Dette materialet er vernet etter åndsverkloven og er helt eller 
delvis fremstilt etter avtale med Kopinor. Materialet kan benyttes 
av studenter som deltar i det aktuelle emnet, for egne studier, i et­
hvert format og på enhver plattform. Uten uttrykkelig samtykke er 
annen eksemplarfremstilling og tilgjengeliggjøring bare tillatt når 
det er hjemlet i lov (kopiering til privat bruk, sitat o.l.) eller avtale 
med Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Digitalt framstilt av:
NTNU Universitetsbiblioteket
This material is protected by copyright law and is wholly or partly 
produced by agreement with Kopinor. The material can be used 
by students who participate in the relevant course, for their own 
studies, in any format and on any platform. Without expressed 
consent, other copying and making available is only permitted 
when authorized by law (copying for private use, quotation, etc.) 
or agreement with Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Cohn, M. (2004), i; User stories applied. 1.utgave (ISBN 9780321205681) 
Chapter 2: Writing Stories


17
Chapter 2
Writing Stories
In this chapter we turn our attention to writing the stories. To create good sto-
ries we focus on six attributes. A good story is:
• Independent
• Negotiable
• Valuable to users or customers
• Estimatable
• Small
• Testable
Bill Wake, author of Extreme Programming Explored and Refactoring
Workbook, has suggested the acronym INVEST for these six attributes (Wake
2003a).
Independent
As much as possible, care should be taken to avoid introducing dependencies
between stories. Dependencies between stories lead to prioritization and plan-
ning problems. For example, suppose the customer has selected as high priority
a story that is dependent on a story that is low priority. Dependencies between
stories can also make estimation much harder than it needs to be. For example,
suppose we are working on the BigMoneyJobs website and need to write stories
for how companies can pay for the job openings they post to our site. We could
write these stories:
1.
A company can pay for a job posting with a Visa card.
2.
A company can pay for a job posting with a MasterCard.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


18
WRITING STORIES
3.
A company can pay for a job posting with an American Express card.
Suppose the developers estimate that it will take three days to support the
first credit card type (regardless of which it is) and then one day each for the
second and third. With highly dependent stories such as these you don’t know
what estimate to give each story—which story should be given the three day
estimate?
When presented with this type of dependency, there are two ways around it:
• Combine the dependent stories into one larger but independent story
• Find a different way of splitting the stories
Combining the stories about the different credit card types into a single large
story (“A company can pay for a job posting with a credit card”) works well in
this case because the combined story is only five days long. If the combined
story is much longer than that, a better approach is usually to find a different
dimension along which to split the stories. If the estimates for these stories had
been longer, then an alternative split would be:
1.
A customer can pay with one type of credit card.
2.
A customer can pay with two additional types of credit cards.
If you don’t want to combine the stories and can’t find a good way to split
them, you can always take the simple approach of putting two estimates on the
card: one estimate if the story is done before the other story, a lower estimate if
it is done after.
Negotiable
Stories are negotiable. They are not written contracts or requirements that the
software must implement. Story cards are short descriptions of functionality,
the details of which are to be negotiated in a conversation between the cus-
tomer and the development team. Because story cards are reminders to have a
conversation rather than fully detailed requirements themselves, they do not
need to include all relevant details. However, if at the time the story is written
some important details are known, they should be included as annotations to
the story card, as shown in Story Card 2.1. The challenge comes in learning to
include just enough detail.
Story Card 2.1 works well because it provides the right amount of informa-
tion to the developer and customer who will talk about the story. When a devel-
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


NEGOTIABLE
19
oper starts to code this story, she will be reminded that a decision has already
been made to accept the three main cards and she can ask the customer if a
decision has been made about accepting Discover cards. The notes on the card
help a developer and the customer to resume a conversation where it left off
previously. Ideally, the conversation can be resumed this easily regardless of
whether it is the same developer and customer who resume the conversation.
Use this as a guideline when adding detail to stories.
On the other hand, consider a story that is annotated with too many notes,
as shown in Story Card 2.2. This story has too much detail (“Collect the expi-
ration month and date of the card”) and also combines what should probably
be a separate story (“The system can store a card number for future use”).
Working with stories like Story Card 2.2 is very difficult. Most readers of
this type of story will mistakenly associate the extra detail with extra precision.
However, in many cases specifying details too soon just creates more work. For
example, if two developers discuss and estimate a story that says simply “a
company can pay for a job posting with a credit card” they will not forget that
their discussion is somewhat abstract. There are too many missing details for
A company can pay for a job posting with a credit card.
Note: Accept Visa, MasterCard, and American Express.
Consider Discover.
■
Story Card 2.1
A story card with notes providing additional detail.
A company can pay for a job posting with a credit card.
Note: Accept Visa, MasterCard, and American Express.
Consider Discover. On purchases over $100, ask for card ID
number from back of card. The system can tell what type of card
it is from the first two digits of the card number. The system
can store a card number for future use. Collect the expiration
month and date of the card.
■
Story Card 2.2
A story card with too much detail.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


20
WRITING STORIES
them to mistakenly view their discussion as definitive or their estimate as accu-
rate. However, when as much detail is added as in Story Card 2.2, discussions
about the story are much more likely to feel concrete and real. This can lead to
the mistaken belief that the story cards reflect all the details and that there’s no
further need to discuss the story with the customer.
If we think about the story card as a reminder for the developer and cus-
tomer to have a conversation, then it is useful to think of the story card as con-
taining:
• a phrase or two that act as reminders to hold the conversation
• notes about issues to be resolved during the conversation
Details that have already been determined through conversations become
tests. Tests can be noted on the back of the story card if using note cards or in
whatever electronic system is being used. Story Card 2.3 and Story Card 2.4
show how the excess detail of Story Card 2.2 can be turned into tests, leaving
just notes for the conversation as part of the front of the story card. In this way,
the front of a story card contains the story and notes about open questions
while the back of the card contains details about the story in the form of tests
that will prove whether or not it works as expected.
Valuable to Purchasers or Users
It is tempting to say something along the lines of “Each story must be valued by
the users.” But that would be wrong. Many projects include stories that are not
valued by users. Keeping in mind the distinction between user (someone who
uses the software) and purchaser (someone who purchases the software), sup-
pose a development team is building software that will be deployed across a
A company can pay for a job posting with a credit card.
Note: Will we accept Discover cards?
Note for UI: Don’t have a field for card type (it can be derived
from first two digits on the card).
■
Story Card 2.3
The revised front of a story card with only the story and questions 
to be discussed.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


VALUABLE TO PURCHASERS OR USERS
21
large user base, perhaps 5,000 computers in a single company. The purchaser of
a product like that may be very concerned that each of the 5,000 computers is
using the same configuration for the software. This may lead to a story like “All
configuration information is read from a central location.” Users don’t care
where configuration information is stored but purchasers might.
Similarly, stories like the following might be valued by purchasers contem-
plating buying the product but would not be valued by actual users:
• Throughout the development process, the development team will produce
documentation suitable for an ISO 9001 audit.
• The development team will produce the software in accordance with
CMM Level 3.
What you want to avoid are stories that are only valued by developers. For
example, avoid stories like these:
• All connections to the database are through a connection pool.
• All error handling and logging is done through a set of common classes.
As written, these stories are focused on the technology and the advantages to
the programmers. It is very possible that the ideas behind these stories are good
ones but they should instead be written so that the benefits to the customers or
the user are apparent. This will allow the customer to intelligently prioritize
these stories into the development schedule. Better variations of these stories
could be the following:
• Up to fifty users should be able to use the application with a five-user
database license.
• All errors are presented to the user and logged in a consistent manner.
Test with Visa, MasterCard and American Express (pass).
Test with Diner’s Club (fail).
Test with good, bad and missing card ID numbers.
Test with expired cards.
Test with over $100 and under $100.
■
Story Card 2.4
Details that imply test cases are separated from the story itself. 
Here they are shown on the back of the story card.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


22
WRITING STORIES
In exactly the same way it is worth attempting to keep user interface assump-
tions out of stories, it is also worth keeping technology assumptions out of sto-
ries. For example, the revised stories above have removed the implicit use of a
connection pool and a set of error handling classes.
The best way to ensure that each story is valuable to the customer or users is
to have the customer write the stories. Customers are often uncomfortable with
this initially—probably because developers have trained them to think of every-
thing they write as something that can be held against them later. (“Well, the
requirements document didn’t say that…”) Most customers begin writing sto-
ries themselves once they become comfortable with the concept that story cards
are reminders to talk later rather than formal commitments or descriptions of
specific functionality.
Estimatable
It is important for developers to be able to estimate (or at least take a guess at)
the size of a story or the amount of time it will take to turn a story into working
code. There are three common reasons why a story may not be estimatable:
1.
Developers lack domain knowledge.
2.
Developers lack technical knowledge.
3.
The story is too big.
First, the developers may lack domain knowledge. If the developers do not
understand a story as it is written, they should discuss it with the customer who
wrote the story. Again, it’s not necessary to understand all the details about a
story, but the developers need to have a general understanding of the story.
Second, a story may not be estimatable because the developers do not under-
stand the technology involved. For example, on one Java project we were asked
to provide a CORBA interface into the system. No one on the team had done
that so there was no way to estimate the task. The solution in this case is to
send one or more developers on what Extreme Programming calls a spike,
which is a brief experiment to learn about an area of the application. During
the spike the developers learn just enough that they can estimate the task. The
spike itself is always given a defined maximum amount of time (called a time-
box), which allows us to estimate the spike. In this way an unestimatable story
turns into two stories: a quick spike to gather information and then a story to
do the real work.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


SMALL
23
Finally, the developers may not be able to estimate a story if it is too big. For
example, for the BigMoneyJobs website, the story “A Job Seeker can find a
job” is too large. In order to estimate it the developers will need to disaggregate
it into smaller, constituent stories.
A Lack of Domain Knowledge
As an example of needing more domain knowledge, we were building a website
for long-term medical care of chronic conditions. The customer (a highly qualified
nurse) wrote a story saying “New users are given a diabetic screening.” The develop-
ers weren’t sure what that meant and it could have run the gamut from a simple web
questionnaire to actually sending something to new users for an at-home physical
screening, as was done for the company’s product for asthma patients. The develop-
ers got together with the customer and found out that she was thinking of a simple
web form with a handful of questions.
Even though they are too big to estimate reliably, it is sometimes useful to
write epics such as “A Job Seeker can find a job” because they serve as place-
holders or reminders about big parts of a system that need to be discussed. If
you are making a conscious decision to temporarily gloss over large parts of a
system, then consider writing an epic or two that cover those parts. The epic
can be assigned a large, pulled–from–thin–air estimate.
Small
Like Goldilocks in search of a comfortable bed, some stories can be too big,
some can be too small, and some can be just right. Story size does matter
because if stories are too large or too small you cannot use them in planning.
Epics are difficult to work with because they frequently contain multiple sto-
ries. For example, in a travel reservation system, “A user can plan a vacation” is
an epic. Planning a vacation is important functionality for a travel reservation
system but there are many tasks involved in doing so. The epic should be split
into smaller stories. The ultimate determination of whether a story is appropri-
ately sized is based on the team, its capabilities, and the technologies in use.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


24
WRITING STORIES
Splitting Stories
Epics typically fall into one of two categories:
• The compound story
• The complex story
A compound story is an epic that comprises multiple shorter stories. For
example, the BigMoneyJobs system may include the story “A user can post her
resume.” During the initial planning of the system this story may be appropri-
ate. But when the developers talk to the customer, they find out that “post her
resume” actually means:
• that a resume can include education, prior jobs, salary history, publica-
tions, presentations, community service, and an objective
• that users can mark resumes as inactive
• that users can have multiple resumes
• that users can edit resumes
• that users can delete resumes
Depending on how long these will take to develop, each could become its
own unique story. However, that may just take an epic and go too far in the
opposite direction, turning it into a series of stories that are too small. For
example, depending on the technologies in use and the size and skill of the
team, stories like these will generally be too small:
• A Job Seeker can enter a date for each community service entry on a
resume.
• A Job Seeker can edit the date for each community service entry on a
resume.
• A Job Seeker can enter a date range for each prior job on a resume.
• A Job Seeker can edit the date range for each prior job on a resume.
Generally, a better solution is to group the smaller stories as follows:
• A user can create resumes, which include education, prior jobs, salary his-
tory, publications, presentations, community service, and an objective.
• A user can edit a resume.
• A user can delete a resume.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


SPLITTING STORIES
25
• A user can have multiple resumes.
• A user can activate and inactivate resumes.
There are normally many ways to disaggregate a compound story. The pre-
ceding disaggregation is along the lines of create, edit, and delete, which is com-
monly used. This works well if the create story is small enough that it can be
left as one story. An alternative is to disaggregate along the boundaries of the
data. To do this, think of each component of a resume as being added and
edited individually. This leads to a completely different disaggregation:
• A user can add and edit education information.
• A user can add and edit job history information.
• A user can add and edit salary history information.
• A user can add and edit publications.
• A user can add and edit presentations.
• A user can add and edit community service.
• A user can add and edit an objective.
And so on. 
Unlike the compound story, the complex story is a user story that is inher-
ently large and cannot easily be disaggregated into a set of constituent stories. If
a story is complex because of uncertainty associated with it, you may want to
split the story into two stories: one investigative and one developing the new
feature. For example, suppose the developers are given the story “A company
can pay for a job posting with a credit card” but none of the developers has
ever done credit card processing before. They may choose to split the stories
like this:
• Investigate credit card processing over the web.
• A user can pay with a credit card.
In this case the first story will send one or more developers on a spike. When
complex stories are split in this way, always define a timebox around the inves-
tigative story, or spike. Even if the story cannot be estimated with any reason-
able accuracy, it is still possible to define the maximum amount of time that will
be spent learning.
Complex stories are also common when developing new or extending known
algorithms. One team in a biotech company had a story to add novel extensions
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


26
WRITING STORIES
to a standard statistical approach called expectation maximization. The com-
plex story was rewritten as two stories: the first to research and determine the
feasibility of extending expectation maximization; the second to add that func-
tionality to the product. In situations like this one it is difficult to estimate how
long the research story will take.
Consider Putting the Spike in a Different Iteration
When possible, it works well to put the investigative story in one iteration and the
other stories in one or more subsequent iterations. Normally, only the investigative
story can be estimated. Including the other, non-estimatable stories in the same iter-
ation with the investigative story means there will be a higher than normal level of
uncertainty about how much can be accomplished in that iteration.
The key benefit of breaking out a story that cannot be estimated is that it
allows the customer to prioritize the research separately from the new function-
ality. If the customer has only the complex story to prioritize (“Add novel
extensions to standard expectation maximization”) and an estimate for the
story, she may prioritize the story based on the mistaken assumption that the
new functionality will be delivered in approximately that timeframe. If instead,
the customer has an investigative, spike story (“research and determine the fea-
sibility of extending expectation maximization”) and a functional story
(“extend expectation maximization”), she must choose between adding the
investigative story that adds no new functionality this iteration and perhaps
some other story that does.
Combining Stories
Sometimes stories are too small. A story that is too small is typically one that
the developer says she doesn’t want to write down or estimate because doing
that may take longer than making the change. Bug reports and user interface
changes are common examples of stories that are often too small. A good
approach for tiny stories, common among Extreme Programming teams, is to
combine them into larger stories that represent from about a half-day to several
days of work. The combined story is given a name and is then scheduled and
worked on just like any other story.
For example, suppose a project has five bugs and a request to change some
colors on the search screen. The developers estimate the total work involved
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


TESTABLE
27
and the entire collection is treated as a single story. If you’ve chosen to use
paper note cards, you can do this by stapling them together with a cover card.
Testable
Stories must be written so as to be testable. Successfully passing its tests proves
that a story has been successfully developed. If the story cannot be tested, how
can the developers know when they have finished coding?
Untestable stories commonly show up for nonfunctional requirements,
which are requirements about the software but not directly about its functional-
ity. For example, consider these nonfunctional stories:
• A user must find the software easy to use.
• A user must never have to wait long for any screen to appear.
As written, these stories are not testable. Whenever possible, tests should be
automated. This means strive for 99% automation, not 10%. You can almost
always automate more than you think you can. When a product is developed
incrementally, things can change very quickly and code that worked yesterday
can stop working today. You want automated tests that will find this as soon as
possible.
There is a very small subset of tests that cannot realistically be automated.
For example, a user story that says “A novice user is able to complete common
workflows without training” can be tested but cannot be automated. Testing
this story will likely involve having a human factors expert design a test that
involves observation of a random sample of representative novice users. That
type of test can be both time-consuming and expensive, but the story is testable
and may be appropriate for some products.
The story “a user never has to wait long for any screen to appear” is not test-
able because it says “never” and because it does not define what “wait long”
means. Demonstrating that something never happens is impossible. A far easier,
and more reasonable target, is to demonstrate that something rarely happens.
This story could have instead been written as “New screens appear within two
seconds in 95% of all cases.” And—even better—an automated test can be writ-
ten to verify this.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


28
WRITING STORIES
Summary
• Ideally, stories are independent from one another. This isn’t always possi-
ble but to the extent it is, stories should be written so that they can be
developed in any order.
• The details of a story are negotiated between the user and the developers.
• Stories should be written so that their value to users or the customer is
clear. The best way to achieve this is to have the customer write the stories.
• Stories may be annotated with details, but too much detail obscures the
meaning of the story and can give the impression that no conversation is
necessary between the developers and the customer.
• One of the best ways to annotate a story is to write test cases for the story.
• If they are too big, compound and complex stories may be split into multi-
ple smaller stories.
• If they are too small, multiple tiny stories may be combined into one big-
ger story.
• Stories need to be testable.
Developer Responsibilities
• You are responsible for helping the customer write stories that are prom-
ises to converse rather than detailed specifications, have value to users or
the customer, are independent, are testable, and are appropriately sized.
• If tempted to ask for a story about the use of a technology or a piece of
infrastructure, you are responsible for instead describing the need in terms
of its value to users or the customer.
Customer Responsibilities
• You are responsible for writing stories that are promises to converse rather
than detailed specifications, have value to users or to yourself, are inde-
pendent, are testable, and are appropriately sized.
From the Library of www.wowebook.com


QUESTIONS
29
Questions
2.1
For the following stories, indicate if it is a good story or not. If not, 
why?
a A user can quickly master the system.
b A user can edit the address on a resume.
c A user can add, edit and delete multiple resumes.
d The system can calculate saddlepoint approximations for 
distributions of quadratic forms in normal variables.
e All runtime errors are logged in a consistent manner.
2.2
Break this epic up into appropriately sized component stories: “A 
user can make and change automated job search agents.”
From the Library of www.wowebook.com
