Dette materialet er vernet etter åndsverkloven og er helt eller 
delvis fremstilt etter avtale med Kopinor. Materialet kan benyttes 
av studenter som deltar i det aktuelle emnet, for egne studier, i et­
hvert format og på enhver plattform. Uten uttrykkelig samtykke er 
annen eksemplarfremstilling og tilgjengeliggjøring bare tillatt når 
det er hjemlet i lov (kopiering til privat bruk, sitat o.l.) eller avtale 
med Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Digitalt framstilt av:
NTNU Universitetsbiblioteket
This material is protected by copyright law and is wholly or partly 
produced by agreement with Kopinor. The material can be used 
by students who participate in the relevant course, for their own 
studies, in any format and on any platform. Without expressed 
consent, other copying and making available is only permitted 
when authorized by law (copying for private use, quotation, etc.) 
or agreement with Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Becker, C., Betz, S. m.fl. (2016). Requirements: The key to sustainability. IEEE 
software. Vol. 33(1), s. 56-65


56 
IEEE SOFTWARE  |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 
0 7 4 0 - 7 4 5 9 /1 6 /$ 3 3 . 0 0  ©  2 016 IEEE
Requirements: 
The Key to 
Sustainability
Christoph Becker, University of Toronto
Stefanie Betz, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Ruzanna Chitchyan, University of Leicester
Leticia Duboc, State University of Rio de Janeiro
Steve M. Easterbrook, University of Toronto
Birgit Penzenstadler, California State University, Long Beach
Norbert Seyff, University of Applied Sciences  
and Arts Northwestern Switzerland
Colin C. Venters, University of Huddersfield
// Software’s critical role in society demands a 
paradigm shift in the software engineering mind-set. 
This shift is driven by requirements engineering. //
SOFTWARE SYSTEMS are a major 
in other technical systems and in so-
driver of social and economic activ-
cioeconomic and natural systems. 
ity. Software engineering (SE) tends 
This embedding is obvious when the 
to focus on the technical elements—
interaction is explicit, such as envi-
artificial systems with clear bound-
ronmental monitoring or flight con-
aries and identifiable parts and con-
trol software.
nections, modules and dependencies. 
However, software-intensive sys-
But software systems are embedded 
tems have become so essential to 
societies that the resulting sociotech-
nical systems’ boundaries and inter-
actions are often hard to identify. 
For example, communication, travel 
booking, and procurement systems 
influence the socioeconomic and 
natural environment through far-
reaching effects on how we form re-
lationships, how we travel, and what 
we buy. The engineering process 
rarely makes these effects explicit. 
Their lack of visibility makes assess-
ing a software system’s long-term and 
cumulative impacts difficult.
Designing for sustainability is a 
major challenge that can profoundly 
change SE’s role in society. But what 
does it mean to establish sustain-
ability as a major concern in SE? As 
software engineers, we’re responsible 
for our software’s long-term conse-
quences, irrespective of the primary 
purpose of the system we’re design-
ing. Requirements are the key lever-
age point for practitioners who want 
to develop sustainable software-
intensive systems. Here, we pre sent 
two examples that illustrate the 
changes needed in SE and show how 
considering sustainability explicitly 
will affect requirements activities.
Sustainability in 
Software Engineering
Sustainability is the capacity to en-
dure, so a system’s sustainability de-
scribes how well it will continue to 
exist and function, even as circum-
stances change. Sustainability has of-
ten been equated with environmental 
issues, but it’s increasingly clear that 
it requires simultaneous consider-
ation of environmental resources, so-
cietal and individual well-being, eco-
nomic prosperity, and the long-term 
viability of technical infrastructure.
A technical system’s sustainabil-
ity differs considerably from that of 
a socioeconomic system. Software 
FOCUS: THE FUTURE OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


 
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2016  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
57
engineers tend to focus on sustain-
ability’s 
technical 
dimension, 
in
which it’s simply a measure of the 
software system’s longevity.1 How-
ever, to understand broader sustain-
ability issues, we must ask which sys-
tem to sustain, for whom, over which 
time frame, and at what cost.2 This 
involves five interrelated dimensions:3
• The individual dimension covers 
individual freedom and agency 
(the ability to act in an environ-
ment), human dignity, and ful-
fillment. It includes individuals’ 
ability to thrive, exercise their 
rights, and develop freely.
• The social dimension covers re-
lationships between individuals 
and groups. For example, it cov-
ers the structures of mutual trust 
and communication in a social 
system and the balance between 
conflicting interests.
• The economic dimension covers 
financial aspects and business 
value. It includes capital growth 
and liquidity, investment ques-
tions, and financial operations.
• The technical dimension covers 
the ability to maintain and evolve 
artificial systems (such as soft-
ware) over time. It refers to main-
tenance and evolution, resilience, 
and the ease of system transitions.
• The environmental dimension 
covers the use and stewardship 
of natural resources. It includes 
questions ranging from immedi-
ate waste production and energy 
consumption to the balance of 
local ecosystems and climate 
change concerns.
Complex software-intensive sys-
tems can affect sustainability in any 
of these dimensions. Changes in one 
system, in one dimension, often have 
impacts in other dimensions and other 
 
systems. For example, consider a hard-
to-maintain software system (technical 
sustainability). Excessive maintenance 
costs affect the owning company’s fi-
nancial liquidity (social and economic 
sustainability). This might limit its
growth and even threaten its survival 
(economic sustainability).
Similar tradeoffs occur across
other dimensions. For example, car-
bon offsets incentivize environmen-
tally sustainable behavior through
tradeoffs with the economic dimen-
sion. The triple-bottom-line perspec-
tive requires a business to account for 
 
 
 
social and environmental as well as
financial outcomes.4 The correspond-
ing business practices have led to a
surge in the number of social enter-
prises, which achieve survival rates
above average for new businesses.5
Increasingly, software engineers
need to understand the effects by
which software system design de-
cisions can enable or undermine
the sustainability of socioeconomic
and natural systems over time (see
the sidebar, “Classifying the Sys-
temic Effects of Software”). Be-
cause sustainability is inherently
multidisciplinary, any effort to de-
fine it involves concepts, principles,
and methods from a range of disci-
plines and makes an integrated view 
crucial for effective system design.
The notion of sustainability design
brings these concerns together using 
systems-thinking principles (see the
sidebar, “Sustainability Principles
for Software Engineering”).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Tale of Two Projects
A software system’s impact on its 
environment is often determined by 
how the software engineers under-
stand its requirements. This impact’s 
foundation is set in the decisions 
on which system to build (if any at 
all), the choices of whom to ask and 
whom to involve, and the specifica-
tion of what constitutes success.
The following examples describe 
two projects to develop a procure-
ment system that supports purchas-
ing products and contracting services 
in a private company in the energy 
sector. Products, services, and sup-
pliers must pass the company’s ap-
proval process and be registered in 
the system before a purchase. This 
approval considers the supplier’s re-
liability, capacity to deliver, and, in 
some cases, adherence to interna-
tional standards of environmental 
management, health, and safety.
The examples are inspired by a 
real-world project.6 The first exam-
ple reflects typical software projects, 
which don’t use sustainability de-
sign. The second shows what could 
happen if a project applied sustain-
ability design. Terms in italics in-
dicate aspects that are common to 
both projects, for easy comparison.
Development without  
Sustainability Design
The project’s purpose is to maximize 
the organization’s procurement effi-
ciency, increase the financial return, 
and ensure suppliers’ compliance 
We need to consider systems’ immediate 
features and effects and their longer-
running aggregate and cumulative impact.


58 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: THE FUTURE OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
with certain rules. The criteria for 
the show.” A few influential stake-
selecting products and services focus 
holders determine the project scope 
on price, delivery time, and payment 
early on so that the project can fo-
conditions.
cus on a minimal design scope to
Using a stakeholder influence ma-
maximize project speed. The proj-
trix, the project leader focuses on 
ect team moves swiftly to determine 
those stakeholders who can “stop 
the boundaries of the software to be; 
 
the only scoping questions revolve 
around the software’s interfaces 
with neighboring systems.
The project’s success criteria 
are to develop and deliver the sys-
tem within the given budget and 
time. The question of feasibility 
centers on the software project in-
vestment’s expected amortization 
period. Risk analysis focuses on eco-
nomic risks that could inhibit project 
completion.
Requirements elicitation requests 
stakeholders’ input through struc-
tured forms to identify what they 
want the system to do. Additionally, 
the team analyzes previous systems 
and consults business process docu-
ments. Requirements prioritization 
is determined by functional require-
ments and economic constraints and 
is completed quickly because the 
core stakeholder group has a strong 
consensus.
The requirements specification is 
documented following the software 
requirements specifications template 
from IEEE Standard 830. System 
measurement and monitoring em-
ploy performance and availability in-
dicators. The system is completed on 
time and within budget and shows 
a reasonably low rate of faults, so 
the project is considered a success at 
completion.
Development  
with Sustainability Design
Consider conducting the same proj-
ect while treating sustainability as a 
first-class concern in line with sus-
tainability design principles (see the 
sidebar, “Sustainability Principles 
for Software Engineering”).
While discussing the project’s 
purpose, the initial project team 
discusses the company’s values 
and responsibilities and identi-
fies opportunities to support the 
CLASSIFYING  
THE SYSTEMIC EFFECTS  
OF SOFTWARE
Many critical effects in sociotechnical systems play out over time. So, we need to 
consider not just our systems’ immediate features and effects but their longer-
running aggregate and cumulative impact. We distinguish three orders of effects.1
Immediate effects are the direct effects of the production, use, and disposal 
of software systems. This includes the immediate benefit of system features and 
the full life-cycle impacts, such as a life-cycle assessment (LCA) would include. 
An LCA evaluates the environmental impact of a product’s life from the extrac-
tion of raw materials to its disposal or recycling.
Enabling effects arise from a system’s application over time. This includes not 
only opportunities to consume more (or fewer) resources but also other changes 
induced by system use.
Structural effects represent “persistent changes observable at the macro lev-
el. Structures emerge from the entirety of actions at the micro level and, in turn, 
influence these actions.”1 Ongoing use of a new software system can lead to 
shifts in capital accumulation; drive changes in social norms, policies, and laws; 
and alter our relationship with the natural world.
Consider Airbnb.com. Its immediate effects include resources consumed and 
jobs created during its development, energy consumed during its deployment, 
and the room renting and booking services it offers. Its enabling effects include 
changes in how its users make travel arrangements as alternatives to hotel 
bookings and in how property owners rent out space.
These enabling effects (the “sharing economy”) have been both praised and 
criticized for their far-reaching structural impacts. For example, Airbnb repre-
sents a substantial share of the buy-to-let market in major cities. The continuing 
price surges in these cities’ hot spots have been linked to the density of buy-to-
let properties. Many of these exist only because of the arbitrage that services 
such as Airbnb.com provide. The system enables transactions that provide a 
higher return on investment than long-term rentals. This has caused major con-
cerns in several large cities.
Reference
 1. L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer, “ICT for Sustainability: An Emerging Research Field,” ICT Innova-
tions for Sustainability, Springer, 2015, pp. 3–36.


 
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2016  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
59
company’s 
sustainable 
develop-
ment. For example, the system can 
support sustainability in the supply 
chain by making transparent the
carbon footprint of purchases and
facilitating the selection of provid-
ers who apply sustainable practices. 
This doesn’t change the overall
project objectives, but it influences 
subsequent steps.
The scope of analysis starts with 
an inclusive, integrated view of the 
procurement 
processes, 
material
flows into the company, and the lo-
cal community’s social and political 
environment. When defining possi-
ble system boundaries, the team ex-
periments with multiple perspectives 
and works jointly with the procure-
ment department and others.
The team expands the set of stake-
holders and draws on knowledge be-
yond the team by using a stakeholder 
impact analysis. This analysis con-
siders enabling and structural effects 
to identify those most affected by the 
project, including those external to
the company. Stakeholders include
local supplier representatives, service 
delivery organizations, process ana-
lysts, the chief technology officer,
and the strategic-planning and fore-
sight group.
To keep the number of stakehold-
ers manageable, a sustainability ex-
pert acts as a surrogate stakeholder 
for others in the community and the 
further environment that the system 
might affect. A team member is as-
signed to each of the five sustain-
ability dimensions so that responsi-
bility for identifying possible effects 
is clear and effective communica-
tion with additional stakeholders
can take place. These team mem-
bers consult relevant experts in areas 
such as supply chain sustainability,
carbon accounting, and socially re-
sponsible procurement. They also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consult anthropologists analyzing 
time and within budget, but will be 
and interpreting current technologi-
measured and monitored over the 
cal developments and their impact 
36 months  after project comple-
on society.
tion. In this period, the team will 
The team agrees that the proj-
measure a set of indicators covering 
ect’s success criteria are not re-
the five sustainability dimensions. It 
stricted to whether it’s delivered on 
will try to measure
SUSTAINABILITY 
PRINCIPLES FOR 
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
The following principles are based on “Sustainability Design and Software: The 
Karlskrona Manifesto.”1
• Sustainability is systemic; a system can never be treated in isolation from 
its environment.
• Sustainability is multidimensional; the five key dimensions are economic, 
social, environmental, technical, and individual.
• Sustainability is interdisciplinary; sustainability design in software engineer-
ing requires an appreciation of concepts from other disciplines and must 
work across disciplines.
• Sustainability transcends the software’s purpose; any software can impact 
the sustainability of its socioeconomic, sociotechnical, cultural, and natural 
environments.
• Sustainability is multilevel; it requires us to consider at least two spheres 
during system design: the system under design and its sustainability, and 
the wider system of which it will be part.
• Sustainability is multi-opportunity; it requires us to seek interventions that 
have the most leverage on a system2 and to consider the opportunity costs.
• Sustainability involves multiple timescales; it requires long-term thinking to 
address the timescales on which sustainability effects occur.
• Sustainability isn’t zero-sum; changing a system’s design to consider the 
long-term effects doesn’t automatically imply making sacrifices now.
• System visibility is a necessary precondition and enabler for sustainability 
design. This is because only a transparent status of the system and its 
context, made visible at different abstraction levels and perspectives, can 
enable system designers to make informed responsible choices.
For more on this, see www.sustainabilitydesign.org.
References
 1. C. Becker et al., “Sustainability Design and Software: The Karlskrona Manifesto,” Proc. 37th 
IEEE Int’l Conf. Software Eng. (ICSE 15), 2015, pp. 467–476.
 2. D.H. Meadows, Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System, Sustainability Inst., 1999.


60 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: THE FUTURE OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
• technical debt,
• social reputation and im-
proved relations with the local 
community,
• individual aspects such as pri-
vacy compliance and the satis-
faction of those involved in the 
procurement process,
• environmental aspects such as 
the total carbon footprint of the 
products and services acquired, 
and
• amortization of the project costs
and improved cost–benefit rela-
tions in procurement.
During risk analysis, the tea
considers internal and external risk
related to systemic effects in all fiv
dimensions. For example, consider
ing the evolving regulations on en
vironmental accountability as a risk
the team develops a set of transpar
ency requirements for the system. I
also identifies uncertainties abou
future shifts in procurement as sus
tainable products become more com
petitive. So, it includes a feature t
monitor these uncertainties.
During requirements elicitation
the team employs participatory tech
niques. The inclusive perspective let
the project leverage contribution
from a broader set of stakeholders
including local service providers. I
a series of workshops, the team use
a sustainability reference goal mode
to derive specific sustainability goal
for the project and align them wit
other system goals, while derivin
extended usage scenarios with th
local community representatives.
The resulting requirements speci
fication is based on a template tha
includes checklists for sustainabilit
criteria and standards compliance i
all five dimensions. The document i
circulated among all the stakehold
ers and is shared with regulator
 
m 
s 
e 
-
-
, 
-
t 
t 
-
-
o 
, 
-
s 
s 
, 
n 
s 
l 
s 
h 
g 
e 
-
t 
y 
n 
s 
-
y 
agencies to demonstrate that the
project meets relevant sustainability 
rules. So, it’s also used more actively 
in subsequent stages.
 
Sustainability Debt
The system resulting from this pro-
curement project is different when 
development takes into account sus-
tainability principles and therefore 
long-term consequences.
Focusing on sustainability de-
sign, software engineers must adopt 
a mind-set quite different from the 
puzzle-solving attitude often found 
in engineering and business. Now, 
the objective is to identify and under-
stand “wicked problems”: problems 
that are deeply embedded in a com-
plex system with no definitive formu-
lation and no clear stopping rule. In 
such cases, every solution changes the 
nature of the problem, so little oppor-
tunity exists for trial-and-error learn-
ing.7,8 Instead, we need an adaptive, 
responsive, and iterative approach 
emphasizing shared understanding.
Figure 1 highlights selected im-
mediate, enabling, and structural ef-
fects of the procurement system in 
the five sustainability dimensions. 
Consider a system feature that tracks 
individual products’ carbon foot-
print, letting users choose products 
with lower footprints. The com-
pound structural effect in the eco-
nomic dimension can benefit local 
suppliers with environmentally sus-
tainable production and can lead to 
a reduced carbon footprint.
The diagram in Figure 1 sup-
ports interactive collaboration among 
stakeholders to discover, document, 
and validate the system’s potential ef-
fects. Not all effects will be positive. 
For example, automating product se-
lection rules to minimize the carbon 
footprint takes away the manager’s 
freedom to make decisions in the 
procurement process.9 This can re-
duce mutual trust between the orga-
nization’s members.
The diagram also facilitates a 
conversation about sustainability 
debt: decisions made for the present 
situation have invisible effects that 
accumulate over time in each of the 
five dimensions.10 When we increase 
energy consumption, reduce indi-
vidual privacy, impose technical bar-
riers, or incur additional financial 
costs, we incur debts in these dimen-
sions to different stakeholders. Mak-
ing these effects visible is the first 
step to understanding and consider-
ing them in system design decisions.
Requirements  
Are the Key
In those two projects, a series of 
decision points occurred during 
system design. Many of them were 
requirements-engineering activities 
that occurred repeatedly in all itera-
tions throughout the projects. Each 
decision influenced the decision 
space of subsequent choices and pro-
foundly affected the system and its 
effects. Table 1 highlights how key 
activities change when we consider 
sustainability design principles.
Requirements’ leverage becomes 
clear when we consider their rela-
tionships with engineering tech-
niques. We develop techniques to 
quantify, construct, and test arti-
facts and to control whether the 
results fall in an acceptable range. 
However, for design concerns such 
as usability, performance, maintain-
ability, or sustainability, such tech-
niques are only applied once a need 
has been identified. Without such a 
need, the engineering techniques will 
remain unused and hence have no ef-
fect on the project.
For 
example, 
techniques 
for 
increasing technical sustainability 


JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2016  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E
61
abound, ranging from architec-
and expressed. On the other hand, 
whatever techniques we develop to 
tural design patterns to documenta-
a stated requirement for which no 
support these activities.
tion guidelines. Yet, because apply-
technique yet exists will lead to an 
So, requirements engineers play 
ing these techniques often involves 
identifi ed gap in technological abil-
a key role in sustainability. As “sus-
an up-front investment of effort, it 
ity. This means that in practice, 
tainability engineers,” they go be-
occurs only when a longer life ex-
systemic changes to the activities in 
yond a narrow system perspective 
pectancy of a system is recognized 
Table 1 will dominate the effects of 
and follow an interdisciplinary, 
ECONOMIC
The procurement 
system’s life-cycle 
costs can be a burden.
System evolution 
can increase 
Markets can reward 
TECHNICAL
technical debt.
environmentally 
sustainable 
production.
Users can choose 
products with 
low carbon
footprints.
System quality: 
The local economy 
maintainability
can be strengthened.
Transparency of 
procurement 
System feature: 
facilitates business
show products’ 
interaction with local
carbon footprint 
suppliers.
The carbon footprint 
AL
can be reduced.
Community 
SOCIAL
relationships 
can be improved.
IMMEDIATE EFFECT
The individual choice of 
ENVIRONMENT
decision makers in the 
Trust within 
supply chain would decrease.
the company 
ENABLING EFFECT
could be 
diminished.
STRUCTURAL EFFECT
INDIVIDUAL
The system makes 
the procurement 
process transparent 
to local suppliers.
The system could 
impose strict rules 
on product selection.
Procurement 
system
FIGURE 1. Selected immediate, enabling, and structural effects of the procurement system in the fi ve sustainability dimensions. The 
diagram supports interactive collaboration among stakeholders to discover, document, and validate the system’s potential effects.


62 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: THE FUTURE OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
systems-oriented, stakeholder-fo
 cused 
technical, economic, and natural en-
which specifies that engineers are 
approach, 
supported 
by 
higher 
vironments and the individuals in 
to “act in accordance with the prin-
management and executives. Their 
those environments.
ciples of sustainability, and prevent 
task is to understand the nature of 
This responsibility is reflected 
avoidable adverse impact on the en-
software-intensive systems and the 
in the new UK Standard for Profes-
vironment and society.”11 It’s up to 
impact those can have on their social, 
sional 
Engineering 
Competence, 
SE curricula developers to equip 
TABLE 1
Table 1. Software engineering practices for sustainability.*
Task
Standard current practice
Focus of future practice
Mind-setting
The world is a puzzle, and we should solve 
The world is complex, and we should first understand the 
the problem.
dilemmas.
Determination of the 
Focus on the immediate business need and 
Emphasize how the project can affect sustainability in all 
project objective and 
key system features. Don’t question the 
dimensions. Strive to advance sustainability in multiple 
the system purpose, 
project’s or system’s purpose.
dimensions simultaneously. Experiment with different system 
boundary, and scope
boundaries to understand the alternative impacts.
External constraint 
See constraints as imposed by the direct 
See constraints in each dimension as opportunities. Look for 
identification
environment of the system and its technical 
constraints from additional sources, starting with company 
interfaces. Minimize the constraints 
corporate-social-responsibility policies, legislation, and 
considered, but include legal, safety, 
sustainability standards.
security, technical, and business resources.
Stakeholder 
Minimize the number of stakeholders 
Maximize stakeholder involvement in an inclusive perspective 
identification
involved, and focus on those who have 
integrating external stakeholders, and involve those who 
influence. Focus on internal stakeholders, 
are affected. Assign a dedicated role to be responsible for 
and exclude unreachable stakeholders.
sustainability, and introduce surrogate stakeholders to represent 
outside interests.
Success criteria 
Focus on the financial bottom line at project 
Focus on advancing multiple dimensions simultaneously, 
definition
completion. Measure the business outcome 
including financial aspects, and take into account that most 
and financial return on investment.
effects occur after project completion.
Requirements 
Focus on the features and immediate effects 
Help the stakeholders understand the system’s enabling effects. 
elicitation
the stakeholders want.
Use creativity techniques and long-term scenarios to forecast 
the potential structural impact.
Risk identification
Identify risks that threaten timely project 
Include the effects on the system’s wider environment. Include 
completion within the budget.
enabling and structural effects and risks that can develop over 
time.
Tradeoff analysis
View tradeoff analysis as a prioritization 
Strive to transform sustainability tradeoffs into mutually 
and selection problem, and let the key 
beneficial situations. Ensure that a wider range of stakeholders 
stakeholders decide.
(or their surrogates) discuss sustainability tradeoffs.
Go/no-go decision
Base the decision on feasibility, financial 
This continues to be an internal business decision but is 
costs and benefits, and risk exposure 
documented to show to external audiences that it took into 
to project participants—that is, internal 
account sustainability indicators and enabling effects. The 
stakeholders.
decision is based on a consideration of positive and negative 
effects in all five dimensions.
Requirements 
Let key stakeholders verify that their 
Ensure broad community involvement focused on understanding 
validation
interests are captured.
effects.
Project completion
Verify whether success criteria are met on 
Evaluate the effects in all five dimensions over a certain time 
the completion date. After that, focus on 
frame after completion, aligned with the expected timescale of 
maintenance and evolution.
effects.
Requirements 
Current templates ignore long-term effects 
Templates require information about sustainability as a design 
documentation
and sustainability considerations.
concern and support analysts with checklists.
* For a description of the dimensions mentioned in the table, see the section “Sustainability in Software Engineering.”


 
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2016  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
63
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divide-and-conquer approach to sys-
tems analysis.
Although these challenging shifts
won’t come easy, taking such per-
spectives provides an opportunity
to stand out, an invitation to inno
vate, and an occasion for software
engineers and companies to distin-
guish themselves with a unique sell-
 
 
-
 
ing point in a competitive market.
We also have the opportunity to help
shape broader sustainability policy. A 
shift to a sustainable society requires
large-scale change both in govern-
ment policy and in engineering and
business practice; neither on its own
will suffice. But regulatory change is
much easier if it builds on established 
best practices, so software practitio-
ners must take the lead.
If you agree that we, as software
engineers, have a responsibility for
the long-term impact of the systems
we design, the sustainability design
principles provide an opportunity to
get started. We can and should start
now, and practitioners can lead the
way. We need to collect experiences
in applying sustainability principles
in SE and learn from the process. An
important way to make this vision of 
software as a force for sustainability
a reality is by cooperation between
industry and academia.
Successful collaborations to inte
grate sustainability concerns into es-
tablished practices can significantly
and positively influence the long-term
effects of the systems we design. To fa-
cilitate this, we must do three things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
 
 
First, we must identify and tackle 
causes of unsustainable software 
design. For this, industry can invite 
academics to research, analyze, and 
reengineer their current development 
processes and practices for improved 
sustainability.
Second, we must develop exem-
plar case studies that demonstrate 
the benefits of sustainability design 
in SE. For this, early adopter indus-
trial collaborators can partner with 
academics to apply research findings 
such as those summarized in Table 1 
and report on longer-term results.
Finally, we must build compe-
tences in the theory and practice of 
sustainable design into the training 
of all software engineers. Industry 
can make the demand for software 
practitioners trained in sustainabil-
ity principles explicit by requiring 
specific competences from potential 
employees. Researchers and educa-
tors should develop improved cur-
ricula that incorporate sustainabil-
ity principles and ensure that future 
software professionals possess the 
competences needed to advance sus-
tainability goals through SE.
Let’s get started.
Acknowledgments
This 
research 
is 
supported 
by 
the 
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft proj-
ect EnviroSiSE (PE2044/1-1); FAPERJ 
(210.551/2015); CNPQ (14/2014); NSERC 
(RGPIN-2014-06638); the European So-
cial Fund; the Ministry for Science, Re-
search, and the Arts  Baden-Württemberg; 
future software engineers with the
competences required to simultane-
ously advance goals in all five di-
mensions, beyond the technical and
economic.
For a long time, concerns about
such effects have taken a backseat in 
SE, but this is changing as standards 
are being adjusted. For example, the 
working group WG42 on ISO/IEC
42030 (Architecture Evaluation) is
discussing energy efficiency and en-
vironmental concerns at the soft-
ware architecture level. In addition,
the IEEE P1680.1 Standard for En-
vironmental Assessment of Personal
Computer Products is being revised.
Although these steps are impor-
tant, a full consideration of all five
sustainability dimensions is needed
on the level of quality models, system 
documentation templates, and the
analysis of systemic effects throughout 
system life-cycle stages. Requirements 
engineers will often be responsible for 
introducing relevant standards in each 
of the five dimensions into the elicita-
tion and specification process. To sup-
port this, revisions of the ISO 25000
series should incorporate sustainabil-
ity considerations related to software
systems’ quality attributes. In addi-
tion, ISO 29148 should acknowledge
the importance of system character-
istics beyond interaction with human
users and encourage consideration of
the systemic effects of software sys-
tems in RE.
S
oftware’s critical role in so-
ciety demands a paradigm
shift in the SE mind-set.
Sustainability 
design 
emphasizes
an appreciation of wicked problems
over a focus on puzzles and pieces,
systems thinking over computational 
problem solving, and an integrated
understanding of systems over a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Software’s critical role in society  
demands a paradigm shift in the 
software engineering mind-set.


64 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: THE FUTURE OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
CHRISTOPH BECKER is an assistant 
professor at the University of Toronto, where 
he leads the Digital Curation Institute, and 
a senior scientist at the Vienna University of 
Technology. His research focuses on sustain-
ability in software engineering and informa-
tion systems design, digital curation and digi-
tal preservation, and digital libraries. Becker 
received a PhD in computer science from the 
Vienna University of Technology. Contact him 
at christoph.becker@utoronto.ca.
STEVE M. EASTERBROOK is a professor 
in the University of Toronto’s Department 
of Computer Science and a member of the 
School of the Environment and the  Centre 
for Global Change Science. His research fo-
cuses on climate informatics—specifi cally, 
applying computer science and software 
engineering to the challenge posed by global 
climate change. Easterbrook received his 
PhD in computing from Imperial College Lon-
don. Contact him at sme@cs.toronto.edu.
STEFANIE BETZ is a senior research 
scientist in the Karlsruhe Institute of Tech-
nology’s Department of Applied Informat-
ics and Formal Description Methods. Her 
research centers on sustainable software 
and systems engineering, particularly from 
the perspective of requirements engineer-
ing and business process management. 
Betz received a PhD in applied informatics 
from the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. 
Contact her at stefanie.betz@kit.edu.
BIRGIT PENZENSTADLER is an assistant 
professor of software engineering at Cali-
fornia State University, Long Beach. Her re-
search focuses on software engineering for 
sustainability and resilience; she leads the 
university’s Resilience Lab. Penzenstadler 
received a habilitation in environmental 
sustainability in software engineering from 
the Technical University of Munich. Contact 
her at birgit.penzenstadler@csulb.edu.
RUZANNA CHITCHYAN is a lecturer 
in the University of Leicester’s Depart-
ment of Computer Science and a member 
of the Centre for Landscape and Climate 
Research. Her research centers on require-
ments engineering and architecture design 
for software-intensive sociotechnical 
systems and sustainability. Chitchyan 
received a PhD in software engineering 
from Lancaster University. Contact her at 
rc256@leicester.ac.uk.
NORBERT SEYFF is a professor in the 
School of Engineering and the Institute of 
4D Technologies at the University of Applied 
Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzer-
land and a senior research associate in the 
University of Zurich’s Department of Infor-
matics. His research focuses on require-
ments engineering and software modeling, 
particularly on empowering and supporting 
end-user participation in system develop-
ment. Seyff received a PhD in computer sci-
ence from Johannes Kepler University Linz. 
Contact him at norbert.seyff@fhnw.ch.
LETICIA DUBOC is a lecturer in the State 
University of Rio de Janeiro’s Department 
of Computer Science and an honor-
ary research fellow at the University of 
Birmingham. Her research focuses on 
software system sustainability and scal-
ability, particularly from the perspective of 
requirements engineering and early analysis 
of software qualities. Duboc received a PhD 
in computer science from University College 
London. Contact her at leticia@ime.uerj.br.
COLIN C. VENTERS is a senior lecturer 
in software systems engineering at the 
University of Huddersfi eld. His research 
focuses on sustainable software systems 
engineering from a software architecture 
perspective for presystem understanding 
and postsystem maintenance and evolution. 
Venters received a PhD in computer science 
from the University of Manchester. Contact 
him at c.venters@hud.ac.uk.


JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2016  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E
65
and the Vienna Science and Technology 
Fund (WWTF) through project Bench-
markDP (ICT2012-46). Special thanks to 
our friend and colleague Sedef Akinli Ko-
cak, a PhD researcher at Ryerson Univer-
sity, for her contributions to this article.
References
 1. H. Koziolek, “Sustainability Evalu-
ation of Software Architectures: A 
Systematic Review,” Proc. Joint ACM 
SIGSOFT Conf.—QoSA and ACM 
SIGSOFT Symp.—ISARCS on Qual-
ity of Software Architectures—QoSA 
and Architecting Critical Systems—
ISARCS (QoSA-ISARCS 11), 2011, 
pp. 3–12.
 2. J.A. Tainter, “Social Complexity and 
Sustainability,” Ecological Complex-
ity, vol. 3, no. 2, 2006, pp. 91–103.
 3. B. Penzenstadler et al., “Safety, 
Security, Now Sustainability: The 
Nonfunctional Requirement for the 
21st Century,” IEEE Software, 
vol. 31, no. 3, 2014, pp. 40–47.
 4. J. Elkington, “Enter the Triple Bot-
tom Line,” The Triple Bottom Line: 
Does It All Add Up? Assessing the 
Sustainability of Business and CSR, 
A. Henriques and J. Richardson, eds., 
Earthscan, 2004, pp. 1–16.
 5. “Who Lives the Longest? Busting the 
Social Venture Survival Myth,” E3M, 
2014; http://socialbusinessint.com
/wp-content/uploads/Who-lives-the
-longest_-FINAL-version2.pdf.
 6. C. Bomfi m et al., “Modelling Sustain-
ability in a Procurement System: An 
Experience Report,” Proc. IEEE 
22nd Int’l Conf. Requirements Eng. 
(RE 14), 2014, pp. 402–411.
 7. H.W. Rittel and M.M. Webber, 
“Dilemmas in a General Theory of 
Planning,” Policy Sciences, vol. 4, 
no. 2, 1973, pp. 155–169.
 8. S. Easterbrook, “From Computa-
tional Thinking to Systems Thinking: 
A Conceptual Toolkit for Sustain-
ability Computing,” Proc. 2nd Int’l 
Conf. Information and Communica-
tion Technologies for Sustainability, 
Atlantis Press, 2014; doi:10.2991
/ict4s-14.2014.28.
 9. J.A. Klein, “A Reexamination of 
Autonomy in Light of New Manufac-
turing Practices,” Human Relations, 
vol. 44, no. 1, 1991, pp. 21–38.
 10. S. Betz et al., “Sustainability Debt: A 
Metaphor to Support Sustainability 
Design Decisions,” Proc. 4th Int’l 
Workshop Requirements Eng. for 
Sustainable Systems (RE4SuSy 15), 
2015; http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1416
/Session2Paper4.pdf.
 11. UK Standard for Professional En-
gineering Competence (UK-SPEC), 
Engineering Council, 2014.
CONFERENCES
in the Palm of Your Hand
IEEE Computer Society’s Conference Publishing Services (CPS) is now offering 
conference program mobile apps! Let your attendees have their conference 
schedule, conference information, and paper listings in the palm of their hands.
The conference program mobile app 
works for Android devices, iPhone, 
iPad, and the Kindle Fire.
For more information please contact cps@computer.org
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
