Dette materialet er vernet etter åndsverkloven og er helt eller 
delvis fremstilt etter avtale med Kopinor. Materialet kan benyttes 
av studenter som deltar i det aktuelle emnet, for egne studier, i et­
hvert format og på enhver plattform. Uten uttrykkelig samtykke er 
annen eksemplarfremstilling og tilgjengeliggjøring bare tillatt når 
det er hjemlet i lov (kopiering til privat bruk, sitat o.l.) eller avtale 
med Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Digitalt framstilt av:
NTNU Universitetsbiblioteket
This material is protected by copyright law and is wholly or partly 
produced by agreement with Kopinor. The material can be used 
by students who participate in the relevant course, for their own 
studies, in any format and on any platform. Without expressed 
consent, other copying and making available is only permitted 
when authorized by law (copying for private use, quotation, etc.) 
or agreement with Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Babb, J., Hoda, R. & Nørbjerg, J. (2014). Embedding reflection and learning 
into agile software development. IEEE software. Vol. 31(4), s. 51-57
Utdraget er klarert i henhold til Kopinoravtalen for dette semesteret: VÅR 2024


0740-7459/14/$31.00 © 2014 IEEE 
JULY/AUGUST 2014  |  IEEE SOFTWARE
51
FEATURE: SECTION TITLE
FOCUS: REFLECTIVE SOFTWARE ENGINEER
Embedding 
Refl ection and 
Learning into 
Agile Software 
Development
Jeffry Babb, West Texas A&M University
Rashina Hoda, University of Auckland
Jacob Nørbjerg, Aalborg University
// The theoretical underpinnings of agile methods 
emphasize regular refl ection as a means to sustainable 
development pace and continuous learning, but in 
practice, high iteration pressure can diminish refl ection 
opportunities. The Refl ective Agile Learning Model 
(REALM) combines insights and results from studies 
of agile development practices in India, New Zealand, 
and the US with Schön’s theory of refl ective practice 
to embed refl ection in everyday agile practices. // 
IMPLICIT IN THE agile tenet—“at 
accordingly”1—is the fact that agile 
regular intervals, the team refl ects 
teams should regularly assess their
on how to become more effective, 
process and its outcomes. Individu-
then tunes and adjusts its behavior 
als and teams are expected to engage 
 
in regular refl ection to maintain and 
improve their software processes.1–5
Using refl ective practice, agile devel-
opers can determine the degree to 
which the process, or aspects of it, 
can be expanded, adapted, altered, 
or abandoned.3 Thus, agile software 
development projects are expected to 
consistently yield results in both ar-
eas of productivity (regular delivery 
of working software) and the refl ec-
tion required to maintain an effec-
tive software process. However, in 
practice, this balancing act between 
productivity and continuous process 
improvement and learning is non-
trivial to achieve and sustain.3 In-
dividuals and teams often perform 
under sustained pressure to deliver 
customer value (iteration pressure) 
and might abandon or under-en-
gage in core agile practices related 
to refl ection and learning, lead-
ing to diminished opportunities for 
knowledge sharing, learning, and 
refl ection.3,6 Without an ongoing re-
fl ective dialog about their practices, 
software teams may experience pro-
cess erosion.7
In this article, we present the 
Refl ective Agile Learning Model 
(REALM), showing where and how 
to integrate refl ective practice in ag-
ile software development. The model 
combines insights and results from 
industrial studies of agile develop-
ment practices in India, New Zea-
land, and the US with Schön’s theory 
of refl ective practice.8–10 Although a 
theoretical synthesis of agile methods 
and Donald Schön’s refl ective prac-
tice isn’t a novel suggestion,2,5,11,12
our approach underscores the ef-
fectiveness of refl ective practice to 
sustain and improve an agile devel-
opment team. REALM provides 
concrete guidelines for embedding 
refl ective practice into an itera-
tive and agile software engineering 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


52 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: REFLECTIVE SOFTWARE ENGINEER
development cycle. This model is an 
evolution of previous models but has 
been refi ned to present a refl ective 
process maintenance perspective.3,6
Drawing upon Evidence
We created REALM by drawing
upon evidence from two industrial-
studies of agile practices: a longitu-
dinal Action Research study of ag-
ile software development in a small 
software company in the US, and a 
Grounded Theory study of software 
teams and practices involving 58 soft-
ware practitioners from 23 differ-
ent companies in New Zealand and 
 
India, most of whom were using agile 
were those most closely related to 
methods such as Scrum, extreme pro-
learning and refl ection.3,6
gramming (XP), or a combination of 
A model for the infusion of refl ec-
the two. Both studies involved obser-
tive practice into XP was a salient 
vations of workplaces and practices 
outcome of the US study. Developers 
plus direct face-to-face interviews of 
engaged in daily learning and refl ec-
team members as a means to collect 
tion habits that reinforced and com-
qualitative data.
plemented activities already endemic 
A prominent fi nding emerging 
to agile methods. We refi ned and 
from both studies independently 
augmented REALM via the learn-
was the teams’ adaptations of stan-
ing-focused practices of the Scrum 
dard agile practices to suit particu-
and XP teams in the Grounded The-
lar organizational or project con-
ory study. The fi ndings from both 
texts. In particular, we found that 
studies complement one another and 
the practices most likely to be lost, 
combine to inform a new model of 
sacrifi ced, or compromised over time 
refl ection in agile practice. 
Release planning
Project goals
1
Group
programming
3
Retrospective
7
Estimation and
iteration planning
2
Learning spike
5
Daily standup
4
Iteration goals
Working software
Pair-in-need
Project wiki
Customer rep
Coach or
Team
Scrum master 
Reflection-in-action
Demo and
acceptance testing
6
Reflection-on-action
FIGURE 1. The Refl ective Agile Learning Model (REALM). Standard and adapted agile practices with implicit refl ection-in-action 
opportunities are depicted in green; learning-focused agile practices with explicit refl ection-on-action opportunities are depicted in blue.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


 
JULY/AU GU S T 2014  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
53
A New REALM  
of Application
As part of a learning team, a reflec-
tive practitioner is one who engages
in two separate but intertwined re-
flective processes: reflection-in-ac-
tion concerning the individual re-
sponses to shaping the problem at
hand and its possible solutions, and
reflection-on-action concerning a
post hoc evaluation process for ex-
tending and validating individual and 
team repertoire. Schön defines rep-
ertoire as an accumulation of ideas,
examples, situations, and actions
gleaned from the whole of a practi-
tioner’s experience such as it is acces-
sible for understanding and action.9 
At 
first, 
this 
might 
seem
either too trivial or too obtuse to
systematically 
guide 
a 
software
process. However, without ongoing
and explicit attention to reflection,
even an agile development team can
lose its ability to learn and improve.
Thus, the purpose of REALM is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to routinize awareness of ongoing 
planning, group programming, pair-
reflection in and on action in agile 
in-need, project wikis, and product 
development projects. The model’s 
demo and acceptance testing. Dur-
development is strongly grounded 
ing these agile activities, developers 
in the reflection-in and -on action 
are most engaged with the materials 
practices identified across the two 
of design and development.
studies. Figure 1 illustrates how 
REALM highlights opportunities 
Release planning. In release plan-
for reflection-in-action, which is 
ning, overall domain context, proj-
implicit in standard and adapted 
ect goals, and product features are 
agile practices (green); reflection-
discussed, which drives the tempo 
on-action includes explicit learning-
and direction of team practices 
focused agile practices (blue). Table 1 
throughout the project. Any clues 
summarizes the model’s steps.
that a project might reveal about 
past contexts and experiences will 
Reflection-in-Action
become evident to the developer at 
A practitioner who’s more conscious 
this stage. The reflective practitioner, 
of her reflection-in-action will be 
with heightened awareness, could be 
more apt to take note of her reac-
more apt to draw from repertoire at 
tions and solutions to new prob-
this point.
lems in a manner that can inform 
her repertoire. This is useful both to 
Collective estimation and iteration 
the practitioner and to the team she 
planning. The team collectively se-
works with. In REALM, these re-
lects and estimates tasks for the 
flections are most evident in release 
current iteration, and in so doing, 
planning, estimation and iteration 
team members acquire and confirm 
TABLE 1
Learning and reflection opportunities  
in the Reflective Agile Learning Model (REALM).
Agile practices
Reflection-in-action
Release planning
Learning about the project, domain, and product
Collective estimation and 
iteration planning
Learning about each other’s skills and areas of expertise, and the team’s collective capacity to delivery 
(velocity)
Group programming
Learning new skills and expertise from each other
Pair-in-need
Novices learning about the team and project as they pair with experts; pairs learning a new technology or skill 
as they work on a challenging task
Project wiki
Capturing project-based learning about the domain and individual reflections (blogs)
Demo and acceptance testing
Learning from acceptance test failures that fuel refinements and guide product vision
Agile practices
Reflection-on-action
Daily standup
Reflection on action performed the previous day, planning for the day’s actions, and highlighting impediments
Learning spike
Adapted practice that embodies reflection on action as some members devote exclusive time to new learning
Retrospective
Standard agile practice devoted exclusively to reflection on actions performed in previous iteration
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


54 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: REFLECTIVE SOFTWARE ENGINEER
knowledge of each other’s skills 
experienced member to learn “the 
repertoire. Opportunities for reflec-
and areas of expertise. Learning 
tricks of the trade.” Other instances 
tion-on-action in REALM are the 
about the team’s collective capac-
include team members pairing up to 
retrospective, the daily standup, and 
ity to deliver (velocity) starts here. 
learn and apply a new technology or 
learning spikes. 
Including the whole team—not just 
skill to solve a challenging task.
Retrospective. While 
most 
agile 
methods call for a retrospective, in 
Individuals and teams need  
practice, it’s an activity that can eas-
ily be skipped or skimped. Retro-
to constantly add to and draw  
spectives provide a means of exam-
from their repertoire.
ining the thoughts, experiences, and 
notes on the various consultations 
with and examinations of both indi-
vidual and team repertoire. This is a 
developers or leads, but stakehold-
Project wikis. Teams often capture 
process of making the tacit explicit 
ers, too—ensures a shared vision 
project-based terminology and con-
by asking of our actions, “What 
and understanding of the project 
text-specific conventions in a wiki 
did/does this mean?” Therefore, re-
based on inputs from multiple per-
format shared between the team and 
flection-on-action in general, and in 
spectives and collective agreements. 
the customer. Individuals might also 
particular during the retrospective, 
Teams can use this as an excellent 
engage in writing blogs to capture 
is both vital and challenging.
opportunity to discuss customer ex-
and share learning gained from proj-
pectations with regard to team pro-
ect experiences.
Daily standup. Repertoire is mostly 
ductivity, which is a key element in 
called on during the “action” stages 
managing learning throughout the 
Product demo and acceptance test-
of a project: a daily standup meeting 
project. The reflective practitioner 
ing. Here the team can again draw 
allows the practitioner and the team 
will look for metaphors and pat-
on its collective repertoire, as it 
to recall recent reflection-in-action 
terns to allow past experience to 
must adjust to the customer’s inter-
while it’s still fresh. This daily rou-
guide and clarify task formulation 
action with and feedback regarding 
tine constitutes a critically important 
and prioritization.
the software’s emerging functional-
component for engaging in reflective 
ities. Although agile methods call 
practice to benefit process mainte-
Group programming. Software de-
on teams to constantly involve the 
nance. Throughout daily practice, 
velopment acutely draws on tacit 
customer, the customer can rarely 
practitioners on the team will ide-
knowledge 
and 
repertoire. 
The 
immerse into the same “zone” as 
ally accumulate observations and re-
working rhythm and velocity of the 
the developers at the height of the 
flections. Thus, the daily standup is 
team will be established, and any 
development process, making for 
an opportunity to aggregate reflec-
corrections and adjustments, par-
a constant translation process. Re-
tions to reinforce or challenge team 
ticularly those made “on the spot,” 
flection-in-action at the moment of 
and individual repertoire. During 
will most benefit from reflection-in-
iteration demonstration and accep-
the daily standup, the team can dis-
action. Overtly and tacitly, habits, 
tance will have an appreciable im-
cuss project velocity and story burn-
skills, and knowledge pass between 
pact on the next iteration and the 
down, as well as develop a platform 
team members in a revelatory man-
nature of the product. 
for observations on repertoire use 
ner in terms of project trajectory and 
and understanding.
risk mitigation. 
Reflection-on-Action
Reflection-on-action is the “after-
Learning spikes. Another test of rep-
Pair-in-need. Agile teams might not 
action report” on how repertoire 
ertoire is the development of proof-
pair-program all the time in prac-
has changed. It’s during reflection-
of-concept “spike” solutions to de-
tice. However, they do pair up on 
on-action that teams attempt to 
termine individual and team ability 
an as needed basis such as when a 
answer questions regarding what 
to branch out into new techniques, 
newcomer to the team pairs with an 
to keep, discard, and modify in 
tools, or knowledge. Spike solutions 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


 
JULY/AU GU S T 2014  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
55
enhance individual and team reper-
toire via experiential learning. 
Practical Examples
During the US study, the software 
team worked over a nine-month
period to make reflection-in-action 
a habit and coerce reflection into 
an explicit activity. Among other 
items, they adopted the habit of 
on-the-spot reflection-in-action by 
“microblogging” in a team wiki to 
accumulate their thoughts and ob-
servations. At the end of the day, 
the developers also contributed to 
a team blog for reflection later that 
night or the next morning: 
“I put it in the wiki right then, I 
knew I wanted to come back to 
it later. There have been a lot of 
times I knew I wanted to come 
back to something that I looked 
at six months ago, but I couldn’t 
remember where I found it, so 
I don’t want to lose this knowl-
edge.” – small shop owner and lead 
developer, Virginia, US
This explicit process of reflec-
tive practice was slowly ingrained 
into the team by habits engaged in 
throughout the day. During devel-
opment, particularly when pair-pro-
gramming, developers would con-
sciously remember to record tidbits 
of reflective writing in their team 
wiki. This habit of microblogging 
was used to “feed” the daily standup 
with a synopsis of interesting obser-
vations and other helpful items. This 
activity became a team expectation 
to be engaged in equally alongside 
more traditional activities that gauge 
project velocity, coordinate task
completion, and so on. These daily 
habits further supported the project 
retrospectives (reflection-on-action)
that formalized the development of 
 
 
 
individual and team repertoire. Be-
practices such as the learning spike 
cause iteration pressure to deliver 
to concentrate on exclusive learn-
maximum customer value as quickly 
ing. For example, a team in New 
and efficiently as possible was quite 
Zealand, as a result of a retrospec-
high, 
reflection-in-action 
helped 
tive session, discovered that manual 
team members annotate their experi-
testing was placing high demands 
ences in the hope that their body of 
on team productivity. As a result of 
knowledge could be tested, verified/
team discussions and with manage-
validated, and documented:
ment support, they agreed to conduct 
a learning spike where team members 
“I think that the blogging, the wiki, 
took exclusive time off project work 
and the daily standup are very 
to create an automated test suite:
important ways to keep an active 
project on track. We have so many 
“We’ve just basically reduced our 
projects going on that if we do not 
velocity and taken the time to do 
follow up, either through the daily 
those things because we knew they 
standup or through the wiki, the 
were important. We made a call 
projects will get off track.” – devel-
that we were not going to wimp 
oper, Virginia, US
out, and go back to the manual 
testing...we’ve taken automation 
The blogs and wikis used by the 
a lot further... doing 100 percent 
US team certainly aren’t novel tools, 
automation.” – agile coach, NZ
but the way in which they facilitated 
the habits necessary to understand 
While the spike led to a reduction 
the tacit-to-explicit process of reflec-
in project velocity in the short-term, 
tive practice was. Daily and regular 
the team clearly benefitted from au-
engagement of these tools provided 
tomating the testing in the long-term 
the team with a means of raising 
across all projects. Lessons from this 
awareness and consciousness of how 
experience were captured and shared 
individual 
practitioners 
framed, 
by the agile coach as presentations to 
shaped, and set problems in their 
the local agile community.
daily work.
Pair-in-need was a common prac-
In the Grounded Theory study, 
tice used across teams in India and 
mature teams tended to use standard 
New Zealand to boost learning while 
practices such as retrospectives ef-
benefitting from investing two minds 
fectively to drive action based on re-
on a particularly challenging problem:
flections on previous iteration:
“The way we do it is that if things 
“With every retrospective, we 
are unpredictable, we always 
certainly came up with ideas to 
take up user stories as a pair … if 
improve our process, and I think 
something [task] requires—this is 
with all those retrospective sessions 
complex, this is design-intensive—
under our belt, with all the experi-
we sit together and pair it.” – agile 
ence sizing, planning, everything 
coach, India
combined, it really made us evolve 
as a team.” – business analyst, NZ
While newer teams (with less 
than a year of experience) in the 
Reflections during retrospectives 
Grounded Theory study struggled to 
led to teams introducing adapted 
embed learning in everyday practice 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


56 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FOCUS: REFLECTIVE SOFTWARE ENGINEER
JEFFRY BABB is an assistant professor of computer informa-
tion systems at West Texas A&M University. His research 
interests include small-team software development, agile 
software development, and mobile application development. 
Babb received a PhD in information systems from Virginia Com-
monwealth University. Contact him at jbabb@wtamu.edu.
RASHINA HODA is the director of the Software Engineer-
ing Processes, Tools and Applications research group in the 
University of Auckland’s Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering. Her research interests include self-organizing 
teams, agile software development, and human-computer inter-
action. Hoda received a PhD in computer science from Victoria 
University of Wellington. Contact her at r.hoda@auckland.ac.nz.
JACOB NØRBJERG is an associate professor in Aalborg 
University’s Department of Computer Science. His research 
interests are in systems development organization and manage-
ment and software process improvement. Nørbjerg received a 
PhD in information systems development from the University of 
Copenhagen. Contact him at jacobnor@cs.aau.dk.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
to varying degrees, mature teams 
mastered refl ection-in and -on ac-
tion. Using standard and adapted 
refl ective practices, these teams were 
able to discover better ways of work-
ing and also worked better together. 
They became highly self-organizing 
in nature.
From Learning Teams to 
Learning Organizations
In the software process context, a 
learning organization8 is an environ-
ment most able to engage in refl ec-
tive practice.2 A learning organiza-
tion recognizes the importance of 
individual and collective knowledge 
within the organization and the need 
to manage it as an asset.2. A learning 
organization values each member’s 
professional development, realizing 
that effective people will make an 
fective product. Whereas refl ecti
practice focuses on developing in
vidual repertoire, a learning orga
zation promotes the accumulation 
individual repertoire.9 In this sen
a learning organization provides
working environment that valu
learning as a daily activity.8 
In essence, the introduction 
refl ective practice to a software d
velopment organization facilitates
learning system in which no partic
lar software development method
as important as the ability to ada
and develop knowledge appropria
in the team. This leaves little dou
as to why agile methods have been 
compelling in software engineeri
for the past decade: agile practical
demands a learning organizatio
ef-
ve 
di-
ni-
of 
se, 
 a 
es 
of 
e-
 a 
u-
 is 
pt 
te 
bt 
so 
ng 
ly 
n. 
Moreover, the habits required to 
engage in refl ective practice would 
more likely be fostered and nurtured 
in a learning organization. 
REALM illustrates the relevance 
of refl ective practice to software en-
gineering for organizational learning 
as it helps accumulate individual and 
team repertoire. As individuals build 
their repertoire, and in turn estab-
lish a team repertoire, both the team 
and the individual are reinforced. 
Team refl ections-on-action can rein-
force individual refl ection-in-action 
to cement learning in a manner that 
strengthens individuals, who in turn 
strengthen team acumen, and ulti-
mately the organization itself.
Recommendations for 
the Refl ective Agile 
Practitioner
A refl ective agile practitioner is any 
software engineering professional—
developer, tester, manager, coach—
empowered by supportive manage-
ment,3 who engages in refl ective 
practice as a means to enhance his or 
her personal and team productivity 
and fuel long-term process and team 
improvements. Based on our experi-
ences with REALM, we can provide 
some recommendations for such re-
fl ective practitioners.
Harness Standard Agile Practices to 
Implicitly Capture Refl ection-in-Action
It’s easy to “go through the mo-
tions” when performing various ag-
ile practices. By being conscious of 
the learning opportunities present 
in everyday agile practices as sug-
gested in REALM (such as release 
planning), an agile practitioner can 
gain signifi cant knowledge about the 
product domain, usage context, re-
quired technologies (including learn-
ing new skills), and individual and 
team capabilities.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


 
JULY/AU GU S T 2014  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
57
Make Effective Use of Retrospectives 
management and enable the practi-
to Achieve Continuous Improvement
tioner to emerge as a thought-leader
The retrospective is a standard ag-
in his or her professional sphere. An
ile practice explicitly designed to 
even less demanding mechanism to
capture reflection-on-action. How-
share lessons with the wider commu-
ever, retrospectives are often eas-
nity is to participate in research ef
ily abandoned or diminished to 
forts that serve to capture the experi-
lip-service as teams get more used 
ences of several practitioners, which
to the process and begin to focus 
in turn can help inform the interna-
exclusively on delivery. Reflective 
tional software community.
practitioners should hold on to the 
practice of retrospectives and use 
them effectively to reflect on their 
lthough reflection as a
processes, thereby achieving con- A
means of learning is 
tinuous improvement.
highly espoused benefit
and expected outcome of agile soft-
Introduce Adapted Agile Practices to 
ware methods, its practice doesn’t
Explicitly Capture Reflection-on-Action
explicitly provide guidance on how
It’s common for practitioners to de-
to create an environment that will
vise new or adapted practices to 
support ongoing learning and re-
overcome particular challenges and 
flection. 
Theoretically, 
however,
needs, such as learning spike, pair-
the focus of agile principles on con-
in-need, and project wikis. A reflec-
tinuous learning presents a unique
tive practitioner should be open to 
opportunity to benefit from the ap-
inventing his or her own strategies or 
plication of the reflective practice
endeavor to be in sync with the latest 
paradigm developed by Schön as a
in the practitioner community to help 
means to achieve process mainte-
with learning and applying strategies 
nance (and evolution).
devised by other practitioners.
REALM uses reflective practice to
develop micro habits for uncovering
Share Lessons within the Organization 
tacit knowledge among a software de-
and Wider Software Community
velopment team. Whether an individ-
Presenting experience reports at lo-
ual must adopt a new beneficial habit
cal and international conferences 
or cease an existing detrimental one,
or workshops is a great way to dis-
habit-forming is a behavior modifica-
tribute the knowledge and learning 
tion concern that’s “easier said than
gained from personal experiences. 
done.” As it has been suggested that
Most agile conferences or work-
practitioners capable of success with
shops host practitioner tracks that 
agile methods should generally be
welcome experience reports and 
high-functioning, the agile tenet for
presentations. Blogging is another 
self-organization is highly correlated
effective practice to achieve similar 
with the habits required for success-
outcomes with limited investments. 
ful reflective practice. 
Popular social networking commu-
Using REALM, software teams
nities also provide ample avenues 
can consider ways to implement
to share with and learn from the 
reflective practice to achieve and
wider practitioner community. Such 
sustain a much-emphasized ele-
efforts are typically well-received 
ment of agile methods: the ability
and even commended by peers and 
to adapt and evolve methods for a
 
 
 
-
 
 
a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continuously 
improving 
software 
process at the individual, team, and 
organizational levels.
References
 1.  A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, “Agile 
Software Development, the People Fac-
tor,” Computer, vol. 34, no. 11, 2001, pp. 
131–133.
 2.  O. Hazzan and J. Tomayko, “The 
Re flective Practitioner Perspective in eX-
treme Programming,” Extreme Program-
ming and Agile Methods: XP/Agile Universe 
2003, F. Maurer and D. Wells, eds., Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 51–61.
 3.  R. Hoda, J. Babb, and, J. Nørbjerg, “To-
ward Learning Teams,” IEEE Software, 
vol. 30, no. 4, 2013, pp. 95–98.
 4.  N.B. Moe, T. Dingsøyr, and T. Dybå, 
“A Teamwork Model for Understanding 
an Agile Team: A Case Study of a Scrum 
Project,” Information and Software Tech-
nology, vol. 52, 2010, pp. 480–491.
 5.  S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, “Theo-
retical Reflections on Agile Development 
Methodologies: The Traditional Goal of 
Optimization and Control is Making Way 
for Learning and Innovation,” Comm. 
ACM, vol. 50, no. 3, 2007, pp. 79–83.
 6.  J. Babb, R. Hoda, and J. Nørbjerg, 
“Barriers to Learning in Agile Software 
Development Projects,” Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering and Extreme Pro-
gramming, H. Baumeister and B. Weber, 
eds., Springer, 2013, pp. 1–15. 
 7.  G. Coleman and R. O’Connor, “Inves-
tigating Software Process in Practice: A 
Grounded Theory Perspective,” J. Systems 
and Software, vol. 81, no. 5, 2008, pp. 
772–784.
 8.  C. Argyris and D. Schön, Organizational 
Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective, 
Addison Wesley, 1978.
 9.  D. Schön, The Reflective Practitioner: 
How Professionals Think in Action, Basic 
Books, 1983.
 10.  D. Schön, Educating the Reflective 
Practitioner: Toward a New Design for 
Teaching and Learning in the Professions, 
Jossey-Bass, 1987.
 11.  J.A. Highsmith, Adaptive Software 
Development: A Collaborative Approach, 
Dorset House, 2000.
 12.  J. McAvoy and T. Butler, “A Failure 
to Learn by Software Developers: Inhibit-
ing the Adoption of an Agile Software 
Development Methodology,” J. Informa-
tion Technology Case and Application 
Research, vol. 11, no. 1, 2009, pp. 23–45.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at  
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on January 06,2021 at 15:15:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
