Dette materialet er vernet etter åndsverkloven og er helt eller 
delvis fremstilt etter avtale med Kopinor. Materialet kan benyttes 
av studenter som deltar i det aktuelle emnet, for egne studier, i et­
hvert format og på enhver plattform. Uten uttrykkelig samtykke er 
annen eksemplarfremstilling og tilgjengeliggjøring bare tillatt når 
det er hjemlet i lov (kopiering til privat bruk, sitat o.l.) eller avtale 
med Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Digitalt framstilt av:
NTNU Universitetsbiblioteket
This material is protected by copyright law and is wholly or partly 
produced by agreement with Kopinor. The material can be used 
by students who participate in the relevant course, for their own 
studies, in any format and on any platform. Without expressed 
consent, other copying and making available is only permitted 
when authorized by law (copying for private use, quotation, etc.) 
or agreement with Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Stray, V., Moe, N. B. & Sjøberg, D.I.K. (2020). Daily stand-up meetings: Start 
breaking the rules. IEEE software. Vol. 37(3), s. 70-77
Utdraget er klarert i henhold til Kopinoravtalen for dette semesteret: VÅR 2024


70
IE E E S O F T WA R E | PU BLI S H E D BY T H E I E E E CO M PU T E R S O CI E T Y
074 0 -74 5 9/2 0 © 2 0 2 0 I E E E
FEATURE: SELF-ORGANIZING SOFTWARE TEAMS
IF YOU WORK on an agile project, 
you are probably familiar with some 
format of the daily stand-up meeting 
because it is a popular practice.1,2
Some staff may see the meeting as a 
necessary venue for communication 
with the team while others consider 
it a waste of time. We have re-
searched daily stand-up meetings for 
almost a decade and helped software 
engineering companies find ways 
to improve them. In this article, we 
share our findings and provide rec-
ommendations on how to conduct
effective daily stand-up meetings.
Agile business methods intro-
duced the practice of daily stand-ups 
to improve communication in soft-
ware development teams. In these 
meetings, team members share in-
formation and thus become aware of 
 
what other members are doing, with 
the hope that team members will 
then align their actions to fit the ac-
tions of the others, i.e., mutual ad-
justment.3 Furthermore, meetings 
that improve access to information 
foster employee empowerment.4
Despite clear guidelines for how 
the 15-min meeting should be con-
ducted,5 through our visits to more 
than 40 companies and several hun-
dred teams, we have found that im-
plementing daily stand-ups in a way 
that benefits the whole team is quite 
challenging. So, how can we adjust 
the practice to boost team perfor-
mance? Understanding how to con-
duct these meetings for self-managing 
software development teams requires 
more than just examining the group’s 
inner workings; we must also under-
stand the organizational context sur-
rounding them. Therefore, we have 
conducted a multiple-case study in 
four software companies to identify 
positive and negative aspects of daily 
stand-up meetings and provide rec-
ommendations on how to make them 
more valuable.
Research Background 
The four companies we studied be-
long to different application do-
mains. ITConsult is a Norwegian IT 
consulting company, TelSoft is an in-
ternational telecommunications soft-
ware company, GlobEng is a global 
software company that provides ser-
vices for the engineering industry, 
and NorBank is a Nordic bank and 
insurance company. Data collection 
and analysis took place from 2010 
to 2018.
To gather different perspectives on 
the meeting, we interviewed 60 proj-
ect members with roles at all levels in 
15 different teams (see Table 1). The 
overall discussion topic was team-
work and meetings, with a particular 
 Daily Stand-Up 
Meetings
Start Breaking the Rules!
Viktoria Stray,  University of Oslo and  SINTEF
Nils Brede Moe,  SINTEF
Dag I.K. Sjøberg, Universi ty of Oslo and SINTEF
//  Daily st and-up meetings are commonly 
used for software teams to collaborate 
and exchange information, but conducting 
them in a way that benefits the whole team 
can be challenging. We describe factors 
that can affect meetings and propose 
recommendations for improving them. //
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MS.2018.2875988
Date of current version: 16 April 2020
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


 
M AY/J U N E 2020  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E 
71
focus on daily stand-up meetings. 
More details on the interview guide 
and research context are available.6,7 
We observed and documented 102 
daily stand-up meetings. Eight of the 
meetings from TelSoft and NorBank 
were audiotaped, transcribed, and 
coded based on a validated coding 
scheme for team meeting processes.8 
Figure 1 shows the proportion of 
words stated in each of the six cat-
egories we identified. The number 
of words can be considered to be a 
proxy for the time spent.
Daily Stand-Ups:  
What, How, When,  
and for Whom?
The interviewees expressed that dis-
cussions other than answering the 
three Scrum questions were most 
valuable. Furthermore, the value of 
the stand-ups was affected by meet-
ing facilitation behavior, the depen-
dencies among tasks, and the time 
of day the meetings were held. In 
addition, we found that junior team 
members were more satisfied with 
the meetings than senior team mem-
bers. See Table 2 for a summary of 
the main benefits of and difficulties 
for conducting daily stand-ups.
What Is Discussed in the Meetings?
and incomplete information, it is rea-
Participants in daily stand-ups are 
sonable to question whether spend-
traditionally supposed to answer a 
ing this time on making decisions is 
variant of only the following three 
worthwhile. A thorough definition 
questions: “What did I do yester-
and analysis of the problem character-
day?” (Q1), “What will I do today?” 
izes a successful problem-solving pro-
(Q2), and “Do I see any impedi-
cess, which may be time-consuming.
ments?” (Q3). We found that the 
To understand decision making 
teams addressed far more than the 
in this context, we use the theory of 
three questions within the 15 min. 
naturalistic decision making,9 which 
Analysis of the transcribed meetings 
postulates that experts can make 
showed that, on average, only 34% 
correct decisions under  challenging 
of the meeting was spent on answer-
conditions, such as time pressure, un-
ing the three questions (see Figure 1). 
certainty, and vague goals, without 
The teams spent almost as much 
having to perform extensive analy-
time (31%) on elaborating on prob-
ses and compare options. They can 
lem issues, discussing possible solu-
use their experience to recognize 
tions, and making decisions, which 
problems that they have encountered 
is also known as problem-focused 
previously. They form mental simula-
communication.8 
tions of the current problem, which 
According to Scrum, the daily 
they use to quickly suggest appropri-
stand-up should not be used to discuss 
ate solutions. Because problem-focused 
the solutions to obstacles raised. 
communication is essential for prob-
However, in the interviews, problem-
lem solving,8 and the stand-up is the 
focused communication was the most 
only daily coordination arena for the 
frequently mentioned positive aspect of 
whole team, we argue that the meet-
these meetings. The teams highly val-
ing is necessary for effective decision 
ued having an arena for quick problem 
making in agile teams.
solving, even if the problem-solving 
Both meeting transcripts and ob-
sessions were as short as 1 min.
servations showed that the prob-
Because the daily stand-up is char-
lem-focused communication usually 
acterized by limited time, uncertainty, 
happened after the team members had 
Table 1. The data sources. 
Company
ITConsult
TelSoft
GlobEng
NorBank
Total/average
Locations visited
Poland, Norway 
Malaysia, 
Norway
China, Poland, Norway, 
United Kingdom
Norway
Nine sites
Number of teams studied
2
3
7
3
15
Average team size (minimum/maximum)
9.5 (9/10)
9.3 (9/10)
8.3 (5/13)
14 (13/14)
10.3 (5/14)
Number of interviews
15
20
13
12
60
Number of stand-up meetings observed
19
39
13
31
102
Average stand-up meeting duration in 
minutes (minimum/maximum)
10.8 (4/18)
15.5 (7/24)
11.6 (4/18)
8.9 (4/13)
11.7 (4/24)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


72
IE E E S O F T WA R E | W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E | @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FEATURE: SELF-ORGANIZING SOFTWARE TEAMS
described what they were going to do 
(Q2) or had mentioned an obstacle
(Q3). Just relaying what they had been 
doing (Q1) rarely triggered problem-
focused communication. Therefore, 
Q2 and Q3 are clearly most impor-
tant for making quick decisions. 
While the interviewees expressed they 
were least happy to spend time on Q1, 
the teams actually spent the most time 
on that question, mainly because talk-
ing about what had been done often 
ended up as cumbersome reporting
with superfluous details.
The challenge of knowing what
others need to know tended to re-
sult in team members trying to include 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1. The proportion of topics discussed in daily stand-up meetings. 
Meeting
Management
4%
Digressions
7%
Coordination 
of Tasks
9%
Project 
Management
15%
Problem-Focused 
Communication
31%
Impediments
 (Q3)
  11%
The Three Scrum 
Will Do
Questions
(Q2)
34%
23%
Have Done 
(Q1)
66%
Table 2. The benefits and problems 
of daily stand-up meetings.
 Main benefits
• Problems are identified, discussed, and resolved quickly.
• The team’s cohesion and shared commitment improve. 
• There is a greater awareness of what other team members are doing.
• Interactions are better coordinated through mutual adjustment.
• The decision-making process becomes more effective.
Main problems
•  The information shared is not perceived to be relevant, particularly due to the diversity in roles, 
tasks, and seniority.
• Managers or Scrum masters use the meeting primarily to receive status information.
• Productivity decreases because the day is broken into slots.
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


M AY/J U N E 2020 |  IE E E S O F T WA R E
73
everything they had worked on, inde-
pendent of its relevance to others. In
one team that did not spend much time 
on Q1, the Scrum master explained,
“We don’t want to know the details of 
what you did yesterday, but something 
that is useful for the whole team. We 
had to change the mind-set and find
out what to say in the meeting. We
practiced a lot and improved.”
How Are the Meetings Facilitated?
If the behavior of the meeting facili-
tator made team members address 
the facilitator, we observed that the 
stand-up often became a status-re-
porting meeting. If the facilitator
managed to make team members
talk to each other, it tended to be-
come a discussion meeting. To illus-
trate the two types of meetings, we 
show conversation charts from two
observations in TelSoft (Figures 2 
and 3). The lines represent an inter-
action between two participants.
Figure 2 shows a reporting meet-
ing in which the facilitator contr-
olled the conversation by allocating
turns for speaking. In this way, team 
members naturally directed their 
responses to her and had fewer in-
teractions with each other. Figure 3
shows a discussion meeting in which 
team members engaged in what the
other members were saying. The fa-
cilitators who managed to get people 
to talk to each other were usually in-
volved in the day-to-day work and
solved team tasks, so therefore had
less need for status information.
Team members who practiced
daily stand-ups as reporting meet-
ings expressed negative attitudes.
One member said it felt like hav-
ing oral exams every day and an-
other said, “No one in the team
really wants to be at the status meet-
ing.” When the regular facilitator of 
such meetings was absent, the team 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usually either dropped the meeting 
person to talk based on the tasks 
that day or they conducted a discus-
that are important to her.” We ob-
sion meeting instead.
served that people who spoke early 
One developer explained, “To-
were given the time they wanted, 
day the Scrum master was not there, 
while the Scrum master cut short 
and we probably had our best daily 
those who spoke last, because the 
meeting. Because usually, the meet-
meeting was approaching its time 
ings are focused on information 
limit. It is negative for a team if, for 
useful to the Scrum master, but not 
example, developers are given more 
for us. He is also more interested in 
time to speak than testers. To make 
what we have done than what we 
the team productive, everyone in the 
are going to do.” Other research has 
team should speak roughly the same 
found that poor meetings may have 
amount of time.10
a negative effect beyond the meet-
Facilitating the meeting can be 
ings themselves, such as reduced job 
even more challenging when the 
satisfaction, coworker trust, and 
team members are distributed be-
well-being.4,11
yond the physical location of the 
When the facilitator had a per-
meeting, which was the case in many 
sonal interest in the status of specific 
of the teams we studied. The teams 
tasks, they often gave team members 
with facilitators who used video in-
working on these tasks more atten-
stead of only audio had more dis-
tion, leading to an unbalanced con-
cussion meetings. One developer 
tribution. One team member said, 
explained, “Use of video changed 
“The Scrum master chooses the next 
our meetings because if you see 
FIGURE 2. A conversation chart for a reporting meeting. 
Facilitator
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


74
IE E E S O F T WA R E | W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E | @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FEATURE: SELF-ORGANIZING SOFTWARE TEAMS
people’s reactions and their gestures, 
meetings were often delayed by a few 
you immediately know whether they 
minutes because some participants 
are listening or are bored, and 
arrived late for work, which made
whether they don’t understand what 
the time spent in the meeting more 
you said.” Additionally, using a large 
than 15 min for those who arrived 
video screen at the right height for 
on time.
standing helped team members to 
More importantly, many team 
acquire the feeling that everyone was 
members considered the meeting to 
a part of the same standing circle, 
be a disruptive interruption, partic-
which further increased team spirit 
ularly during programming activi-
and improved the communication.
ties. One developer said, “I find the 
meeting useful, but the interruption 
When Are the Meetings Held?
it causes is disturbing. I have to de-
Most agile teams conduct their daily 
tach myself from what I am work-
stand-ups in the morning. A few 
ing on, and when I get back it takes 
team members told us that it is good 
some time to start again where I left 
to start the day by gathering the 
off.” Therefore, even when arriving 
team, to hear what people will be 
early, some team members waited 
working on and whether it will face 
until after the meeting to start work-
any obstacles. Nevertheless, in many 
ing on challenging issues, and in-
cases, we found that an early start 
stead spent their time before the 
time reduced the perceived value of 
meeting on tasks that did not require 
the meeting and the effectiveness of 
concentration. This behavior is natu-
the team. We observed that early 
ral because other research has found 
 
that most developers need more than 
15 min to resume work after an in-
terruption.12 Starting early in the 
morning (e.g., 8:30 a.m.) or late in 
the afternoon (e.g., 3:30 p.m.) was 
also seen as undermining the much-
valued flexibility regarding work 
hours in the companies.
Participants said that starting 
later in the day (e.g., 10:00 a.m.) was 
also problematic because there was 
not enough time between the daily 
meeting and lunch to do anything 
useful. Many staff members felt that 
starting right before lunch was a bet-
ter option because then there was 
no added interruption and the team 
could go and eat lunch together.
Who Benefits Most From 
the Meetings?
The way work was assigned and co-
ordinated affected the dynamics of 
the stand-ups. In some teams, there 
were few interdependencies between 
different members’ tasks, mainly be-
cause they had specialized roles and 
low knowledge redundancy; that is, 
team members had expertise in dif-
ferent technical areas and worked 
on separate modules. Therefore, 
what one team member worked on 
was often uninteresting or irrelevant 
for members other than the Scrum 
master or technical lead, so staff 
usually did not pay attention when 
others were talking.
When there is little interdepen-
dence among team members, there is 
less need for mutual adjustment and 
problem-focused communication 
and, as a result, most of the time is 
instead spent on reporting. Particu-
larly, there is less interdependence 
in larger teams because everyone’s 
work depends on only a fraction of 
others’ work. Accordingly, we ob-
served that larger teams had more 
reporting meetings. NorBank had 
FIGURE 3. A conversation chart for a discussion meeting.
Facilitator
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


M AY/J U N E 2020 |  IE E E S O F T WA R E
75
the largest teams, partly as a conse-
quence of having BizDevOps teams, 
which include people from business, 
development, and operations. Dis-
cussing problems among such a vari-
ety of roles would have required too 
much time and would not have been 
relevant for all attendees.
When more people attend a meet-
ing, there is less time available for 
each person to be active, so team 
members are generally less satisfied 
with large meetings. Consistent with 
what we found in a recent survey of 
stand-ups, there was a significant de-
crease in meeting satisfaction when 
the team comprised more than 12 
members.2 Furthermore, we found 
that experience played an important 
role with respect to who benefitted 
from the meeting. Junior team mem-
bers were generally more positive than 
senior ones. These senior team mem-
bers often perceived the daily stand-
ups as having little personal value
because they already knew what was 
going on and did not receive any new 
information in the meeting.
Moreover, the positive attitude 
toward problem-solving discussions
is more relevant to junior staff be-
cause the problems they encounter 
are easier to solve in a daily stand-
up format. Senior team members 
often work on more complex tasks 
in which the problems require more 
expertise and time to resolve than a 
daily stand-up allows. Also, when an 
experienced team member works on 
a complex task, there might be little 
progress for some days, and team
members do not see repeating what is 
said in the previous meeting as valu-
able. One senior developer said, “The 
intervals are too short to report on; 
often you feel that you did not have 
much progress from the day before.”
We have also seen that se-
nior team members attend more 
 
 
 
meetings, both internal to the team 
and external, in addition to the daily 
stand-ups. The daily meeting is then 
considered to be an additional daily 
interruption, which may reduce the 
well-being of senior team members 
because a higher meeting load nega-
tively affects fatigue levels and sub-
jective workload.11
Recommendations
In our longitudinal study, we made a 
set of initial recommendations on the 
basis of our early interviews and ob-
servations. Several teams then tried 
these guidelines. While there is no 
clear recipe for conducting a suc-
cessful daily stand-up that fits all 
companies, we make the following 
recommendations based on all our 
data collection and analysis.
Omit Question 1
To avoid the daily stand-up becom-
ing a status-reporting meeting that 
does not realize its potential ben-
efits, we suggest that team mem-
bers do not report what has been 
accomplished since the last meet-
ing (Q1). Eliminating this question 
will reduce status-reporting and 
self-justification, in which partici-
pants explain in detail what they 
have done and why they have not 
achieved as much as expected. More 
time will then be available to dis-
cuss and solve problems.
While it is valuable for team 
members to know the status and 
progress of the other team mem-
bers’ tasks, such information can 
be shared more efficiently by other 
means. For example, some teams 
display their status on a visual 
board, and some use a chatbot in 
Slack (an electronic communication 
tool) to collect status information 
from everyone, which is later posted 
to the whole team.
Share Facilitation Responsibility
Facilitators need to consciously al-
lot equal time to all participants. It 
is easy (often unconsciously) to al-
low some people to talk more than 
others because the information from 
these people may be of particular 
interest to the facilitators. Further-
more, facilitators must be aware of 
how the allocation of who speaks 
during the meeting affects the con-
versation flow. Try both an approach 
in which the tasks on the board are 
discussed and a round-robin ap-
proach in which the team members 
know, without interruptions, who 
will speak next.
An alternative to having one ap-
pointed facilitator is to circulate the 
facilitator role among a set of team 
members, which is what some of 
the observed teams did. Leadership 
that is broadly distributed instead of 
centralized in the hands of a single 
individual is known as shared lead-
ership. This form of leadership can 
empower a team and foster both the 
task-related and social dimensions 
of a group’s function, such as trust, 
cohesion, and commitment. Because 
new facilitators may influence how 
the meeting is carried out, sharing 
the facilitator role will give the team 
opportunities to reflect upon differ-
ent ways to conduct the daily stand-
ups. If the facilitator is not the same 
person as the team leader, it is less 
likely that the daily stand-up be-
comes a status-reporting meeting.
Meet Right Before Lunch
If a team decides to conduct daily 
stand-ups, the meetings must fit the 
rhythm of the team members’ days and 
weeks. It is important to find the least 
disruptive time to reduce the potential 
for fragmented work. In many cases, 
conducting the meeting early in the 
morning has some drawbacks. Right 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


76 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
FEATURE: SELF-ORGANIZING SOFTWARE TEAMS
before lunch may be a better time, as 
meeting five times a week. For exam-
it will merge two interruptions. Many 
ple, small, collocated teams that have 
teams tried this, and one respondent 
a high degree of informal communi-
commented on not having the meet-
cation may not need a daily meeting. 
ing in the morning: “There are many 
Furthermore, in a large team there 
advantages with the new time; one is 
will be less need for mutual adjust-
that people have different preferences 
ment among all of the team mem-
when it comes to what time to arrive 
bers. Therefore, it might be better 
at work. When having the stand-up 
to split the team into smaller groups 
late, all of us are able to have moments 
and hold separate meetings for staff 
of flow before the meeting. It is also 
that works together on a daily ba-
much easier to remember what you 
sis, with less frequent meetings for 
are working on. I know the trend has 
the whole team. Alternatively, team 
spread to other teams.”
members may post answers to the 
Furthermore, hungry team mem-
three Scrum questions electronically 
bers are more prone to end the meet-
on a daily basis, and then have a less 
ing on time and, in addition, they are 
frequent physical meeting in which 
more likely to have lunch together, 
they can concentrate on problem- 
which will stimulate team cohesion. 
focused communication.
They can also continue discussions 
on their way to lunch and during 
lunch, if needed.
e have worked with many 
teams in different com-
Adapt the Frequency
panies who have exper-
The daily stand-up meeting is, as the W
imented with our recommendations 
name indicates, intended to be con-
(Table 3). They have stopped asking 
ducted daily. However, we found 
Q1 (“What did you do yesterday?”) 
that not all teams benefit from 
and instead started sharing the 
facilitation responsibility to opti-
mize communication patterns and 
changed the frequency and time of 
meetings. In particular, setting the 
correct meeting time (right before 
lunch) has been widely adopted and 
appreciated. Furthermore, we have 
yet to meet any teams who have rein-
stated Q1 after a trial period without 
it. Members appreciate focusing on 
the work that is ahead of them and 
being allowed to discuss problems 
and solutions. One recommendation 
that has been adopted less frequently 
is sharing the facilitator role, proba-
bly because Scrum masters and team 
leaders feel that it is their responsi-
bility to facilitate the meetings.
When we help companies, we al-
ways advise them to collect informa-
tion about the daily meeting, to gain 
insights regarding their team and 
how to enhance its productivity. Hav-
ing a person from another team draw 
a conversation chart (see Figure 2) is 
a technique that may provide insight 
as well as a valuable basis for discus-
sions about daily stand-ups. Relevant 
questions to discuss are as follows. 
• “How can all team members 
benefit from the meeting?” 
• “Are people talking to each 
other or to the facilitator?”
• “Is it a reporting or discussion 
meeting?”
• “Who should facilitate the 
meeting?”
• “Is every team member talking 
approximately the same amount 
of time?”
• “Should the meeting focus on 
people or tasks?”
We advise all agile teams to try 
to improve their meetings by experi-
menting with breaking the rules that 
they follow. Taking responsibility for 
improving the meetings will make the 
Table 3. Recommendations for daily stand-up meetings.
Stop asking, “What did you do yesterday?”
• Reduce the time spent on status reporting and self-justification.
• Focus on future work, particularly considering dependencies and obstacles.
• Spend time discussing and solving problems as well as making quick decisions.
Optimize the communication pattern.
• Share the leadership to increase joint responsibility, such as by rotating the facilitator role.
• Team members should communicate with each other and not report to the facilitator.
Find the least disruptive time.
• Consider scheduling the meeting right before lunch to decrease the number of interruptions.
Find the frequency that offers the most value.
• In a team that communicates well, stop meeting daily if three or four times a week is sufficient.
•  In a large team, some members do not need to meet as frequently as others, depending on the 
interdependencies among tasks and members.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


M AY/J U N E 2020 |  IE E E S O F T WA R E
77
team more self-managed. An agile 
software team should continuously 
inspect and adapt the daily stand-up 
meeting to fulfil the team’s needs. 
Some of the adjustments might be 
about challenging the old mindset, 
such as conducting the meetings daily 
and in the morning, and discuss-
ing only the three Scrum questions. 
Teams that make appropriate adjust-
ments become more productive. 
References
VersionOne, “VersionOne 13th An-
nual State of Agile Report,” May 
2019. [Online]. Available: https://
explore.versionone.com/state-of-agile/
13th-annual-state-of-agile-report
1. V. Stray, N. B. Moe, and G. R. Berg-
ersen, “Are daily stand-up meetings 
valuable? A survey of developers in 
software teams,” in Int. Conf. Agile 
Processes in Software Engineering 
and Extreme Programming, 2017, 
pp. 274–281.
2. H. Mintzberg, Mintzberg on Man-
agement: Inside our Strange World 
of Organizations. New York: Free 
Press, 1989. 
3. J. A. Allen, N. Lehmann-Willen-
brock, and S. J. Sands, “Meetings 
as a positive boost? How and when 
meeting satisfaction impacts em-
ployee empowerment,” J. Bus. Res., 
vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 4340–4347, Oc t. 
2016. 
4. K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, 
“The Scrum guide,” No v. 2017, pp. 
1–19. [O
 nline]. Available: http://
scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/
v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf
5. V. Stray, D. I. K. Sjøberg, and T. 
Dybå, “The daily stand-up meeting: 
A grounded theory study,” J. Syst. 
Softw., vol. 114, pp. 101–124, Apr. 
2016.
6. H. Nyrud and V. Stray, “Inter-
team coordination mechanisms in 
 large-scale agile,” in Proc. ACM X
2017 Scientific Workshops, pp. 1–
doi: 10.1145/3120459.3120476.
7. S. Kauffeld and N. Lehmann- 
Willenbrock, “Meetings matter: Effe
of team meetings on team and organ-
isational success,” Small Group Res.,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 130–158, Mar. 20
8. G. Klein, “Naturalistic decision ma
ing,” Hum. Factors, vol. 50, no. 3, 
pp. 456–460, June 2008. 
9. C. Duhigg, “What Google lea
 rned 
from its quest to build the perfect 
t eam,” New York Times, Feb. 25, 
2016. [Online]. Available: https://
www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/
magazine/what-google-learned
P 
6. 
cts 
 
12.
k-
-from-its-quest-to-build-the-perfect
-team.html 
10. A. Luong and S. G. Rogelberg, “Meet-
ings and more meetings: The relation-
ship between meeting load and the 
daily well-being of employees,” Group 
Dyn., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 58–67, 2005. 
11. C. Parnin and S. Rugaber, “Resump-
tion strategies for interrupted program-
ming tasks,” Software Quality J., 
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 5–34, Aug. 2011.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
VIKTORIA STRAY is an associate professor in the Department of 
Informatics, University of Oslo, Sweden, and is a researcher at SIN-
TEF. Her research interests include agile methods, global software 
engineering, teamwork, coordination, and large-scale develop-
ment. Stray received a Ph.D. in software engineering from the 
University of Oslo. She is a Member of the IEEE and ACM. Contact 
her at stray@ifi.uio.no.
NILS BREDE MOE is a senior scientist at SINTEF and an 
adjunct professor at the Blekinge Institute of Technology. His 
research interests relate to organisational, sociotechnical, and 
global/distributed aspects. Moe received a Ph.D. in computer 
science from the Norwegian University of Science and Tech-
nology, Trondheim. Contact him at nilsm@sintef.no.
DAG I.K. SJØBERG is a professor at the University of Oslo. 
His research interests are the software lifecycle, including 
agile and lean development processes, and empirical research 
methods in software engineering. Sjøberg received a Ph.D. 
in computing science from the University of Glasgow. He is a 
Member of the IEEE and ACM. Contact him at dagsj@ifi.uio.no.
Access all your IEEE Computer 
Society subscriptions at
computer.org
/mysubscriptions
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 06,2020 at 17:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
