Dette materialet er vernet etter åndsverkloven og er helt eller 
delvis fremstilt etter avtale med Kopinor. Materialet kan benyttes 
av studenter som deltar i det aktuelle emnet, for egne studier, i et­
hvert format og på enhver plattform. Uten uttrykkelig samtykke er 
annen eksemplarfremstilling og tilgjengeliggjøring bare tillatt når 
det er hjemlet i lov (kopiering til privat bruk, sitat o.l.) eller avtale 
med Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Digitalt framstilt av:
NTNU Universitetsbiblioteket
This material is protected by copyright law and is wholly or partly 
produced by agreement with Kopinor. The material can be used 
by students who participate in the relevant course, for their own 
studies, in any format and on any platform. Without expressed 
consent, other copying and making available is only permitted 
when authorized by law (copying for private use, quotation, etc.) 
or agreement with Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Waterman, M. (2018). Agility, risk, and uncertainty, part 1: 
Designing an agile architecture. IEEE software. Vol. 35(2), s. 99-101 


0 740-7459/18/$33.00 © 2018 IEEE 
M A R CH /A PR I L 2018  |  IEEE SOFTWARE
99
THE PRAGMATIC  
ARCHITECT
Editor: Eoin Woods
Endava 
eoin.woods@endava.com
Agility, Risk, and 
Uncertainty, Part 1: 
Designing an Agile 
Architecture
Michael Waterman
SOFTWARE ARCHITECTS IN ag-
ile environments face the dilemma
of determining how much effort
goes into architecting up front, be-
fore development starts. This is
an issue that agile methodologies
and frameworks don’t address and
that’s becoming more critical as ag-
ile development gets used for a wider 
range of problems. This article is the 
first of two that discuss findings of
my recent research based on the ex-
periences of 44 agile practitioners,1
to help shed light on the problem.
If architects (whether individual
architects or the development team
as a whole) spend too much time ar-
chitecting up front, they’ll struggle
to be agile. This is partly because
they’re making architectural deci-
sions too early—decisions that could 
later prove to be wrong or subject to 
change. It’s also because this exces-
sive effort will delay development
and the opportunity for early cus-
tomer feedback.
On the other hand, too little ar-
chitecting results in ad hoc deci-
sions that might not support the
system’s architecturally significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements—the requirements that 
impact the architecture. If the team 
is spending all its time fixing archi-
tectural problems that should have 
been thought through up front, it’s 
not delivering customer value. And, 
just as if the team spent too much 
time architecting, it will struggle to 
be agile.
Somewhere in between is the op-
timal level of architecting that maxi-
mizes the team’s architectural agility. 
How can we determine this optimal 
level? To answer that, we must re-
alize that the optimal level depends 
highly on the team’s context. This 
context includes whether the require-
ments are stable, the amount of tech-
nical risk, how early the customer 
wants to start using the system (per-
haps earning revenue from it), the 
team’s agility, how agile-friendly the 
team’s environment is (such as busi-
ness and administration or project 
stakeholders), and the team’s archi-
tectural and technical experience.
The Agile Architecture
The context determines the team’s 
ability to design an agile architecture— 
one that supports the team’s agility 
and hence its ability to respond to 
change. I define agile architecture us-
ing two dimensions:
• It has been designed using an 
agile process.
• It’s modifiable and tolerant of 
change.
The former means that the architec-
ture isn’t a static set of decisions—it 
evolves as the system evolves and as 
the team revisits architectural deci-
sions. The latter means that the ar-
chitecture can adapt more easily as 
the system changes.
Neither dimension by itself is nec-
essarily sufficient for the architec-
ture to be agile. An architecture can 
be designed using an agile process 
but not be particularly modifiable 
and tolerant of change. As Simon 
Brown said, “In my experience … 
teams are more focused on deliver-
ing functionality rather than looking 
after their architecture.”2 An archi-
tecture can be designed to be modifi-
able and tolerant of change, but if it’s 
not designed using an agile process, 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 17,2020 at 12:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


100 
IE E E S O F T WA R E  |  W W W.CO M PU T E R .O R G /S O F T WA R E  |  @ I E E E S O F T WA R E
it can’t fully welcome change (the 
system grows and the requirements 
second principle of the Agile Mani-
evolve. However, that’s desirable be-
festo; agilemanifesto.org) as an in-
cause the decisions are delayed until 
trinsic characteristic.
the team has the best understanding 
My research found that teams 
about how to implement them.
design agile architectures using five 
Proving the architecture with
tactics:
code iteratively means simultaneous 
design and development, which is 
• Keep designs simple.
particularly useful if uncertainty ex-
• Prove the architecture with code 
ists about whether the architecture 
iteratively.
will meet the requirements. Simul-
• Use good design practices.
taneous design and coding lets the 
• Delay decision making.
team prove the architecture with real 
• Plan for options.
code, rather than through analysis, 
and refine the design if necessary. 
Each tactic differently impacts the 
This lets the team come up with the 
required responsiveness to change 
simplest solution that works. So, like 
and the amount of up-front design. 
the simplicity tactic, this increases 
Table 1 summarizes these impacts.
modifiability and reduces the up-
Keeping designs simple is all 
front effort.
about designing only for what’s im-
Good design practices to improve 
mediately required: no overengineer-
modifiability include separation of 
ing or gold-plating, no designing 
concerns (for example, service-oriented 
for what might be required (called 
architecture, microservices, and en-
YAGNI—You Ain’t Gonna Need It— 
capsulated modules) and using qual-
in Extreme Programming3). Simplic-
ity management tools to ensure good 
ity reduces the detail in the design 
design at the class level. Although 
and the up-front effort. It increases 
good design practices should be an 
the ease with which the design can 
architect’s goal no matter what de-
be modified because there’s less de-
velopment process he or she uses, 
sign to change. Of course, simplic-
they’re especially important in agile 
ity guarantees that the architecture 
development because they reduce the 
will need to be updated later as the 
effort required to change the design. 
 
Good design practices don’t reduce 
the up-front effort; indeed, they can 
increase it because they require ex-
tra discipline. However, the bene-
fits they bring are worth that extra 
effort2 because changes can be iso-
lated and limited to small parts of 
the system.
Delaying decision making is re-
lated to simplicity: this tactic aims 
to reduce the impact of trying to pre-
dict requirements that aren’t fully 
understood yet. Decisions are left 
as late as possible without delaying 
development, which allows the team 
as much time as possible to under-
stand the requirements. Delaying 
decisions makes the architectural 
decisions more tolerant of change: 
fewer decisions must be revisited as 
requirements change, and the design 
requires less change.
Planning for options means the 
team makes decisions that retain 
flexibility and don’t close off future 
options. The architecture is designed 
to be easily extended. Although 
planning for options is related to 
good design practices, it’s less about 
general modularity and encapsula-
tion and more about understanding 
what might need changing later and 
ensuring that the design isn’t opti-
mized so much that it makes those 
changes difficult. This tactic doesn’t 
reduce up-front effort (and might 
increase it if, for example, the team 
uses extra levels of indirection to 
make changes to a particular tech-
nology layer easier).
The participants in my research 
used some or all of these five tac-
tics to produce smaller, simpler, 
and more agile architecture designs 
that grow and evolve as the partici-
pants’ understanding of the systems 
develops. Hence, these tactics sup-
port their teams’ ability to respond 
to change.
Table 1. Tactics for designing agile architecture and 
their impacts.
Tactic
Impact on responsiveness to 
change
Reduces up-front design 
effort?
Keep designs simple
Increases modifiability
Yes
Prove the architecture with 
code iteratively
Increases modifiability
Yes
Use good design practices
Increases modifiability
No
Delay decision making
Increases tolerance to change
Yes
Plan for options
Increases tolerance to change
No
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 17,2020 at 12:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT
M A R CH /A PR I L 2018  |  IE E E S O F T WA R E
101
I
n tension with minimizing de-
sign effort and deferring deci-
sions as long as possible is the 
architect’s need to reduce technical 
risk. Risk has a big impact on archi-
tects’ ability to design an agile archi-
tecture and thus how much up-front 
design they do. I’ll discuss this im-
pact in Part 2. 
References
1. M. Waterman, J. Noble, and G. 
Software Eng. (ICSE 15), 2015, pp. 
3. M. Fowler, “Is Design Dead?,” Ex-
Allen, “How Much Up-Front? A 
347–357.
treme Programming Examined, G. 
Grounded Theory of Agile Archi-
2. S. Brown, Software Architecture for 
Succi and M. Marchesi, eds., Addison-
tecture,” Proc. 2015 Int’l Conf. 
Developers, Leanpub, 2013.
Wesley Longman, 2001, pp. 3–17.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MICHAEL WATERMAN is a solution architect at Specialised Architecture 
Services. Contact him at mike@specarc.co.nz.
www.computer.org/silverbullet
*Also available at iTunes
This series of in-depth interviews with 
prominent security experts features Gary 
McGraw as anchor. IEEE Security & Privacy 
magazine publishes excerpts of the 20-minute 
conversations in article format each issue.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 17,2020 at 12:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
