--- Page 1 ---
Know Your  
Customers’  
“Jobs to Be Done”
Is innovation inherently a hit-or-miss endeavor? Not if  
you understand why customers make the choices they do.  
BY CLAYTON M. CHRISTENSEN, TADDY HALL, KAREN DILLON, AND DAVID S. DUNCAN
SPOTLIGHT
54 Harvard Business Review September 2016
SPOTLIGHT ON CONSUMER INSIGHT


--- Page 2 ---
ARTWORK Marijah Bac Cam, Blue Landscape  
Charcoal, ink, marker, and pencil on paper
F
or as long as we can remember, innovation 
has been a top priority—and a top 
frustration—for leaders. In a recent 
McKinsey poll, 84% of global executives reported 
that innovation was extremely important to their 
growth strategies, but a staggering 94% were 
dissatisfied with their organizations’ innovation
HBR.ORG
September 2016 Harvard Business Review 55


--- Page 3 ---
Madness time. Marketers who collect demographic 
or psychographic information about him—and look 
for correlations with other buyer segments—are not 
going to capture those reasons. 
After decades of watching great companies fail, 
we’ve come to the conclusion that the focus on cor-
relation—and on knowing more and more about cus-
tomers—is taking firms in the wrong direction. What 
they really need to home in on is the prog­ress that the 
customer is trying to make in a given circumstance—
what the customer hopes to accomplish. This is what 
we’ve come to call the job to be done. 
We all have many jobs to be done in our lives. 
Some are little (pass the time while waiting in line); 
some are big (find a more fulfilling career). Some 
surface unpredictably (dress for an out-of-town busi-
ness meeting after the airline lost my suitcase); some 
regularly (pack a healthful lunch for my daughter to 
take to school). When we buy a product, we essen-
tially “hire” it to help us do a job. If it does the job 
well, the next time we’re confronted with the same 
job, we tend to hire that product again. And if it does 
a crummy job, we “fire” it and look for an alternative. 
(We’re using the word “product” here as shorthand 
for any solution that companies can sell; of course, 
the full set of “candidates” we consider hiring can 
often go well beyond just offerings from companies.) 
This insight emerged over the past two decades in 
a course taught by Clay at Harvard Business School. 
(See “Marketing Malpractice,” HBR, December 
2005.) The theory of jobs to be done was developed 
in part as a complement to the theory of disruptive 
innovation—which at its core is about competitive 
responses to innovation: It explains and predicts the 
behavior of companies in danger of being disrupted 
and helps them understand which new entrants 
pose the greatest threats. 
But disruption theory doesn’t tell you how to 
create products and services that customers want 
to buy. Jobs-to-be-done theory does. It transforms 
our understanding of customer choice in a way that 
no amount of data ever could, because it gets at the 
causal driver behind a purchase.
The Business of Moving Lives
A decade ago, Bob Moesta, an innovation consultant 
and a friend of ours, was charged with helping bolster 
sales of new condominiums for a Detroit-area build-
ing company. The company had targeted downsizers—
retirees looking to move out of the family home and 
The focus on 
knowing more 
and more about 
customers has 
taken firms in the 
wrong direction.
performance. Most people would agree that the vast 
majority of innovations fall far short of ambitions. 
On paper, this makes no sense. Never have busi-
nesses known more about their customers. Thanks 
to the big data revolution, companies now can col-
lect an enormous variety and volume of customer 
information, at unprecedented speed, and perform 
sophisticated analyses of it. Many firms have estab-
lished structured, disciplined innovation processes 
and brought in highly skilled talent to run them. Most 
firms carefully calculate and mitigate innovations’ 
risks. From the outside, it looks as if companies have 
mastered a precise, scientific process. But for most of 
them, innovation is still painfully hit-or-miss. 
What has gone so wrong? 
The fundamental problem is, most of the masses 
of customer data companies create is structured to 
show correlations: This customer looks like that one, 
or 68% of customers say they prefer version A to ver-
sion B. While it’s exciting to find patterns in the num-
bers, they don’t mean that one thing actually caused 
another. And though it’s no surprise that correlation 
isn’t causality, we suspect that most managers have 
grown comfortable basing decisions on correlations. 
Why is this misguided? Consider the case of one of 
this article’s coauthors, Clayton Christensen. He’s 64 
years old. He’s six feet eight inches tall. His shoe size 
is 16. He and his wife have sent all their children off to 
college. He drives a Honda minivan to work. He has 
a lot of characteristics, but none of them has caused 
him to go out and buy the New York Times. His rea-
sons for buying the paper are much more specific. He 
might buy it because he needs something to read on 
a plane or because he’s a basketball fan and it’s March 
SPOTLIGHT ON CONSUMER INSIGHT
56 Harvard Business Review September 2016


--- Page 4 ---
divorced single parents. Its units were priced to 
appeal to that segment—$120,000 to $200,000—
with high-end touches to give a sense of luxury. 
“Squeakless” floors. Triple-waterproof basements. 
Granite counters and stainless steel appliances. A 
well-staffed sales team was available six days a week 
for any prospective buyer who walked in the door. A 
generous marketing campaign splashed ads across 
the relevant Sunday real estate sections.
The units got lots of traffic, but few visits ended 
up converting to sales. Maybe bay windows would 
be better? Focus group participants thought that 
sounded good. So the architect scrambled to add 
bay windows (and any other details that the focus 
group suggested) to a few showcase units. Still sales 
did not improve. 
Although the company had done a cost-benefit 
analysis of all the details in each unit, it actually 
had very little idea what made the difference be-
tween a tire kicker and a serious buyer. It was easy to 
speculate about reasons for poor sales: bad weather, 
underperforming salespeople, the looming reces-
sion, holiday slowdowns, the condos’ location. But 
instead of examining those factors, Moesta took an 
unusual approach: He set out to learn from the peo-
ple who had bought units what job they were hiring 
the condominiums to do. “I asked people to draw a 
timeline of how they got here,” he recalls. The first 
thing he learned, piecing together patterns in scores 
of interviews, was what did not explain who was 
most likely to buy. There wasn’t a clear demographic 
or psychographic profile of the new-home buyers, 
even though all were downsizers. Nor was there a 
definitive set of features that buyers valued so much 
that it tipped their decisions.
But the conversations revealed an unusual 
clue: the dining room table. Prospective customers 
repeatedly told the company they wanted a big 
living room, a large second bedroom for visitors, and 
a breakfast bar to make entertaining easy and casual; 
on the other hand, they didn’t need a formal dining 
room. And yet, in Moesta’s conversations with ac-
tual buyers, the dining room table came up repeat-
edly. “People kept saying, ‘As soon as I figured out 
what to do with my dining room table, then I was 
free to move,’” reports Moesta. He and his colleagues 
couldn’t understand why the dining room table was 
such a big deal. In most cases people were referring 
to well-used, out-of-date furniture that might best be 
given to charity—or relegated to the local dump.
But as Moesta sat at his own dining room table 
with his family over Christmas, he suddenly under-
stood. Every birthday was spent around that table. 
Every holiday. Homework was spread out on it. The 
table represented family. 
What was stopping buyers from making the de-
cision to move, he hypothesized, was not a feature 
that the construction company had failed to offer 
but rather the anxiety that came with giving up 
something that had profound meaning. The decision 
to buy a six-figure condo, it turned out, often hinged 
on a family member’s willingness to take custody of 
a clunky piece of used furniture.
That realization helped Moesta and his team 
begin to grasp the struggle potential home buyers 
faced. “I went in thinking we were in the business of 
new-home construction,” he recalls. “But I realized 
we were in the business of moving lives.”
With this understanding of the job to be done, 
dozens of small but important changes were made 
to the offering. For example, the architect managed 
to create space in the units for a dining room table by 
reducing the size of the second bedroom. The com-
pany also focused on easing the anxiety of the move 
itself: It provided moving services, two years’ worth 
of storage, and a sorting room within the condo 
Idea in Brief
WHAT’S WRONG
Innovation success rates are  
shockingly low worldwide, and  
have been for decades.
WHAT’S NEEDED
Marketers and product developers 
focus too much on customer profiles 
and on correlations unearthed 
in data, and not enough on what 
customers are trying to achieve  
in a particular circumstance. 
WHAT’S EFFECTIVE
Successful innovators identify  
poorly performed “jobs” in 
customers’ lives—and then  
design products, experiences,  
and processes around those jobs. 
HBR.ORG
September 2016 Harvard Business Review 57
KNOW YOUR CUSTOMERS’ “JOBS TO BE DONE”


--- Page 5 ---
Jobs are never simply about function—they 
have powerful social and emotional dimen-
sions. Creating space in the condo for a dining room 
table reduced a very real anxiety that prospective 
buyers had. They could take the table with them 
if they couldn’t find a home for it. And having two 
years’ worth of storage and a sorting room on the 
premises gave condo buyers permission to work 
slowly through the emotions involved in deciding 
what to keep and what to discard. Reducing their 
stress made a catalytic difference. 
These principles are described here in a business-
to-consumer context, but jobs are just as important 
in B2B settings. For an example, see the sidebar 
“Doing Jobs for B2B Customers.” 
Designing Offerings Around Jobs
A deep understanding of a job allows you to innovate 
without guessing what trade-offs your customers 
are willing to make. It’s a kind of job spec. 
Of the more than 20,000 new products evaluated 
in Nielsen’s 2012–2016 Breakthrough Innovation re-
port, only 92 had sales of more than $50 million in 
year one and sustained sales in year two, excluding 
close-in line extensions. (Coauthor Taddy Hall is 
the lead author of Nielsen’s report.) On the surface 
the list of hits might seem random—International 
Delight Iced Coffee, Hershey’s Reese’s Minis, and 
Tidy Cats LightWeight, to name just a few—but they 
have one thing in common. According to Nielsen, 
every one of them nailed a poorly performed and 
very specific job to be done. International Delight 
Iced Coffee let people enjoy in their homes the taste 
of coffeehouse iced drinks they’d come to love. And 
development where new owners could take their 
time making decisions about what to discard. 
The insight into the job the customers needed 
done allowed the company to differentiate its offer-
ing in ways competitors weren’t likely to copy—or 
even comprehend. The new perspective changed 
everything. The company actually raised prices by 
$3,500, which included (profitably) covering the cost 
of moving and storage. By 2007, when industry sales 
were off by 49% and the market was plummeting, 
the developers had actually grown business by 25%. 
Getting a Handle on  
the Job to Be Done
Successful innovations help consumers to solve 
problems—to make the prog­ress they need to, while 
addressing any anxieties or inertia that might be 
holding them back. But we need to be clear: “Job 
to be done” is not an all-purpose catchphrase. Jobs 
are complex and multifaceted; they require precise 
definition. Here are some principles to keep in mind:
“Job” is shorthand for what an individual 
really seeks to accomplish in a given circum-
stance. But this goal usually involves more than just 
a straightforward task; consider the experience a per-
son is trying to create. What the condo buyers sought 
was to transition into a new life, in the specific circum-
stance of downsizing—which is completely different 
from the circumstance of buying a first home.
The circumstances are more important than 
customer characteristics, product attr­ibutes, 
new technologies, or trends. Before they under-
stood the underlying job, the developers focused on 
trying to make the condo units ideal. But when they 
saw innovation through the lens of the customers’ 
circumstances, the competitive playing field looked 
totally different. For example, the new condos were 
competing not against other new condos but against 
the idea of no move at all. 
Good innovations solve problems that for-
merly had only inadequate solutions—or no 
solution. Prospective condo buyers were looking for 
simpler lives without the hassles of home ownership. 
But to get that, they thought, they had to endure the 
stress of selling their current homes, wading through 
exhausting choices about what to keep. Or they could 
stay where they were, even though that solution 
would become increasingly imperfect as they aged. It 
was only when given a third option that addressed all 
the relevant criteria that shoppers became buyers. 
Jobs are never 
simply about 
function—they have 
powerful social 
and emotional 
dimensions.
58 Harvard Business Review September 2016
SPOTLIGHT ON CONSUMER INSIGHT


--- Page 6 ---
also essential to create the right set of experiences for 
the purchase and use of the product and then inte-
grate those experiences into a company’s processes. 
When a company does that, it’s hard for com-
petitors to catch up. Take American Girl dolls. If you 
don’t have a preteen girl in your life, you may not 
understand how anyone could pay more than a hun-
dred dollars for a doll and shell out hundreds more 
for clothing, books, and accessories. Yet to date the 
business has sold 29 million dolls, and it racks up 
more than $500 million in sales annually.
What’s so special about American Girls? Well, it’s 
not the dolls themselves. They come in a variety of 
styles and ethnicities and are lovely, sturdy dolls. 
They’re nice, but they aren’t amazing. Yet for nearly 
30 years they have dominated their market. When 
you see a product or service that no one has success-
fully copied, the product itself is rarely the source of 
the long-term competitive advantage. 
American Girl has prevailed for so long because 
it’s not really selling dolls: It’s selling an experience. 
Individual dolls represent different times and places 
in U.S. history and come with books that relate each 
doll’s backstory. For girls, the dolls provide a rich 
opportunity to engage their imaginations, connect 
with friends who also own the dolls, and create 
unforgettable memories with their mothers and 
grandmothers. For parents—the buyers—the dolls 
help engage their daughters in a conversation about 
thanks to Tidy Cats LightWeight litter, millions of cat 
owners no longer had to struggle with getting heavy, 
bulky boxes off store shelves, into car trunks, and up 
the stairs into their homes.
How did Hershey’s achieve a breakout success 
with what might seem to be just another version 
of the decades-old peanut butter cup? Its research-
ers began by exploring the circumstances in which 
Reese’s enthusiasts were “firing” the current prod-
uct formats. They discovered an array of situations—
driving the car, standing in a crowded subway, play-
ing a video game—in which the original large format 
was too big and messy, while the smaller, individu-
ally wrapped cups were a hassle (opening them re-
quired two hands). In addition, the accumulation 
of the cups’ foil wrappers created a guilt-inducing 
tally of consumption: I had that many? When the 
company focused on the job that smaller versions 
of Reese’s were being hired to do, it created Reese’s 
Minis. They have no foil wrapping to leave a telltale 
trail, and they come in a resealable flat-bottom bag 
that a consumer can easily dip a single hand into. The 
results were astounding: $235 million in the first two 
years’ sales and the birth of a breakthrough category 
extension. 
Creating customer experiences. Identifying 
and understanding the job to be done are only the 
first steps in creating products that customers want—
especially ones they will pay premium prices for. It’s 
Identifying Jobs to Be Done
Jobs analysis doesn’t 
require you to throw out 
the data and research 
you’ve already gathered. 
Personas, ethnographic 
research, focus groups, 
customer panels, 
competitive analysis, and 
so on can all be perfectly 
valid starting points 
for surfacing important 
insights. Here are five 
questions for uncovering 
jobs your customers 
need help with.
Do you have a job that needs to be 
done? In a data-obsessed world, it 
might be a surprise that some of the 
greatest innovators have succeeded 
with little more than intuition to 
guide their efforts. Pleasant Rowland 
saw the opportunity for American 
Girl dolls when searching for gifts 
that would help her connect with 
her nieces. Sheila Marcelo started 
Care.com, the online “matchmaking” 
service for child care, senior care, 
and pet care, after struggling with 
her family’s own care needs. Now, 
less than 10 years later, it boasts 
more than 19 million members 
across 16 countries and revenues 
approaching $140 million. 
Where do you see noncon­sump­
tion? You can learn as much 
from people who aren’t hiring any 
product as from those who are. 
Nonconsumption is often where the 
most fertile opportunities lie, as 
SNHU found when it reached out to 
older learners. 
What work-arounds have people 
invented? If you see consumers 
struggling to get something done 
by cobbling together work-arounds, 
pay attention. They’re probably 
deeply unhappy with the available 
solutions—and a promising base of 
new business. When Intuit noticed 
that small-business owners were 
using Quicken―designed for 
individuals—to do accounting for 
their firms, it realized small firms 
represented a major new market.
What tasks do people want to 
avoid? There are plenty of jobs in 
daily life that we’d just as soon get 
out of. We call these “negative jobs.” 
Harvard Business School alum Rick 
Krieger and some partners decided 
to start QuickMedx, the forerunner 
of CVS MinuteClinics, after Krieger 
spent a frustrating few hours waiting 
in an emergency room for his son to 
get a strep-throat test. MinuteClinics 
can see walk-in patients instantly, 
and their nurse practitioners can 
prescribe medicines for routine 
ailments, such as conjunctivitis,  
ear infections, and strep throat. 
What surprising uses have 
customers invented for existing 
products? Recently, some of the 
biggest successes in consumer 
packaged goods have resulted from 
a job identified through unusual uses 
of established products. For example, 
NyQuil had been sold for decades as 
a cold remedy, but it turned out that 
some consumers were knocking back 
a couple of spoonfuls to help them 
sleep, even when they weren’t sick. 
Hence, ZzzQuil was born, offering 
consumers the good night’s rest they 
wanted without the other active 
ingredients they didn’t need.
HBR.ORG
September 2016 Harvard Business Review 59
KNOW YOUR CUSTOMERS’ “JOBS TO BE DONE”


--- Page 7 ---
box. It’s not the same as walking down the aisle in 
the toy store and picking a Barbie off the shelf.’” 
In recent years Toys “R” Us, Walmart, and even 
Disney have all tried to challenge American Girl’s 
success with similar dolls—at a small fraction of the 
price. Though American Girl, which was acquired 
by Mattel, has experienced some sales declines in 
the past two years, to date no competitor has man-
aged to make a dent in its market dominance. Why? 
Rowland thinks that competitors saw themselves in 
the “doll business,” whereas she never lost sight of 
why the dolls were cherished: the experiences and 
stories and connections that they enable. 
Aligning processes. The final piece of the 
puzzle is processes—how the company integrates 
across functions to support the job to be done. 
Processes are often hard to see, but they matter 
profoundly. As MIT’s Edgar Schein has discussed, 
processes are a critical part of an organization’s 
unspoken culture. They tell people inside the com-
pany, “This is what matters most to us.” Focusing 
processes on the job to be done provides clear 
guidance to everyone on the team. It’s a simple but 
powerful way of making sure a company doesn’t 
unintentionally abandon the insights that brought 
it success in the first place.
A good case in point is Southern New Hampshire 
University, which has been lauded by U.S. News & 
World Report (and other publications) as one of the 
most innovative colleges in America. After enjoying 
a 34% compounded annual growth rate for six years, 
SNHU was closing in on $535 million in annual 
revenues at the end of fiscal 2016. 
Like many similar academic institutions, SNHU 
once struggled to find a way to distinguish itself and 
survive. The university’s longtime bread-and-butter 
strategy had relied on appealing to a traditional stu-
dent body: 18-year-olds, fresh out of high school, 
continuing their education. Marketing and outreach 
were generic, targeting everyone, and so were the 
policies and delivery models that served the school. 
SNHU had an online “distance learning” aca-
demic program that was “a sleepy operation on a 
nondescript corner of the main campus,” as presi-
dent Paul LeBlanc describes it. Yet it had attracted 
a steady stream of students who wanted to resume 
an aborted run at a college education. Though the 
online program was a decade old, it was treated 
as a side proj­ect, and the university put almost no 
resources into it.
the generations of women that came before them—
about their struggles, their strength, their values 
and traditions. 
American Girl founder Pleasant Rowland came 
up with the idea when shopping for Christmas pres­
ents for her nieces. She didn’t want to give them hy-
persexualized Barbies or goofy Cabbage Patch Kids 
aimed at younger children. The dolls—and their 
worlds—reflect Rowland’s nuanced understanding 
of the job preteen girls hire the dolls to do: help artic-
ulate their feelings and validate who they are—their 
identity, their sense of self, and their cultural and 
racial background—and make them feel they can 
surmount the challenges in their lives. 
There are dozens of American Girl dolls repre-
senting a broad cross section of profiles. Kaya, for 
example, is a young girl from a Northwest Native 
American tribe in the late 18th century. Her backstory 
tells of her leadership, compassion, courage, and 
loyalty. There’s Kirsten Larson, a Swedish immigrant 
who settles in the Minnesota territory and faces hard-
ships and challenges but triumphs in the end. And so 
on. A significant part of the allure is the well-written, 
historically accurate books about each character’s life. 
Rowland and her team thought through every 
aspect of the experience required to perform the job. 
The dolls were never sold in traditional toy stores. 
They were available only through mail order or at 
American Girl stores, which were initially located in 
just a few major metropolitan areas. The stores have 
doll hospitals that can repair tangled hair or fix bro-
ken parts. Some have restaurants in which parents, 
children, and their dolls can enjoy a kid-friendly 
menu—or where parents can host birthday parties. 
A trip to the American Girl store has become a spe-
cial day out, making the dolls a catalyst for family 
experiences that will be remembered forever.
No detail was too small to consider. Take the 
sturdy red-and-pink boxes the dolls come in. 
Rowland remembers the debate over whether to 
wrap them with narrow cardboard strips, known as 
“belly bands.” Because the bands each added 2 cents 
and 27 seconds to the packaging process, the de-
signers suggested skipping them. Rowland says she 
rejected the idea out of hand: “I said, ‘You’re not get-
ting it. What has to happen to make this special to the 
child? I don’t want her to see some shrink-wrapped 
thing coming out of the box. The fact that she has to 
wait just a split second to get the band off and open 
the tissue under the lid makes it exciting to open the 
60 Harvard Business Review September 2016
SPOTLIGHT ON CONSUMER INSIGHT


--- Page 8 ---
SNHU’s online program was in competition 
not with local colleges but with other national on-
line programs, including those offered by both 
traditional colleges and for-profit schools like the 
University of Phoenix and ITT Technical Institute. 
Even more significantly, SNHU was competing with 
nothing. Nonconsumption. Suddenly, the market 
that had seemed finite and hardly worth fighting for 
became one with massive untapped potential. 
But very few of SNHU’s existing policies, struc-
tures, and processes were set up to support the 
actual job that online students needed done. What 
had to change? “Pretty much everything,” LeBlanc 
recalls. Instead of treating online learning as a 
second-class citizen, he and his team made it their 
On paper, both traditional and online students 
might look similar. A 35-year-old and an 18-year-old 
working toward an accounting degree need the same 
courses, right? But LeBlanc and his team saw that the 
job the online students were hiring SNHU to do had 
almost nothing in common with the job that “com-
ing of age” undergraduates hired the school to do. On 
average, online students are 30 years old, juggling 
work and family, and trying to squeeze in an educa-
tion. Often they still carry debt from an earlier college 
experience. They’re not looking for social activities or 
a campus scene. They need higher education to pro-
vide just four things: convenience, customer service, 
credentials, and speedy completion times. That, the 
team realized, pre­sented an enormous opportunity.
Des Traynor is a cofounder of 
Intercom, which makes software 
that helps companies stay in 
touch with customers via their 
websites, mobile apps, e‑mail, 
and Facebook Messenger. 
Intercom, which now has more than 
10,000 customers and grew fourfold 
in 2015, adopted a jobs-to-be-done 
perspective to clarify its strategy in 2011, 
when it was still an early-stage start-up. 
Traynor spoke about that experience  
with Derek van Bever and Laura Day  
of Harvard Business School’s Forum  
for Growth & Innovation. Here is an 
edited version of their conversation.
FORUM: How did you come across the “jobs” 
approach to innovation and strategy? 
TRAYNOR: Somewhat by accident! In 2011 
Intercom had just four engineers and some 
modest VC backing. I was asked to speak 
about managing a start-up at a conference. 
Clay Christensen opened the conference and 
mentioned “jobs to be done.”
And that made an impression because…?  
We were searching for direction at the time. We 
knew we wanted to help internet companies talk 
to their customers―and to make that personal. 
We knew that the features we shipped were 
valuable—but we didn’t really know who was 
using us. Customer support? Marketing? Market 
research? Nor did we know exactly what they 
were using us for. 
How had you approached those questions 
until then? We were using a personas-based 
approach to segmentation, but it wasn’t working. 
We had too many “typical 
users” who had little  
in common, going by traits 
like demographics or job 
titles. Because we didn’t  
really understand why people 
were coming to the platform—
what they were using it for—we 
charged a single price for access to 
the entire platform. 
As soon as I grasped the distinction between 
“customers” and “problems people need help 
with,” a lightbulb went off. I called my cofounder 
Eoghan McCabe and said, “We’re going to build a 
company that is focused on doing a job.” 
And how did you figure out what the relevant 
job was? We got in touch with innovation 
consultant Bob Moesta, who has a lot of practical 
experience with this approach. Bob and his team 
conducted individual interviews with two types 
of customers: people who had recently signed on 
with us, and people who had dropped the service 
or changed their usage significantly.
He wanted to understand the timeline of 
events that led up to a purchasing decision and 
the “forces” that ultimately pushed people into 
that decision. Bob has a theory that customers 
always experience conflict when considering a 
new purchase—what he calls “the struggling 
moment.” There are pressures pushing them to 
act―to solve a problem by “hiring” a solution—
and forces like inertia, fear of change, and 
anxiety holding them back. His overall objective 
was to explain, in the customers’ words, what 
caused people to resolve the conflict and “hire” 
Intercom, and then how well Intercom performed.
I listened in on four interviews live—and tried 
not to jump to judgment. Two things stood 
out. One, prospective clients who sampled our 
services were usually flailing. Their growth had 
flattened, and they were ready to try something 
new. And two, the words they 
described our product with were 
really different from the words 
we used. People using it to sign 
up new customers kept using 
the word “engage,” for example. 
We used the term “outbound 
messaging,” which has a very 
different feel. 
According to Bob, this is really common: 
Companies fall in love with their own jargon. They 
focus on the technology being offered rather than 
the value being delivered. 
What did you learn about the jobs you were 
being hired to do? It turned out that people  
had four distinct jobs: First, help me observe. 
Show me the people who use my product and 
what they do with it. Second, help me engage—
to convert sign-ups into active users. Third, help 
me learn—give me rich feedback from the right 
people. And finally, help me support—to fix my 
customers’ problems.
How much did you change the business 
once you understood the different jobs your 
customers had? A lot. We now offer four 
distinct services, each designed to support one 
of those jobs. Our R&D group—120 people―has 
four teams, one for each job, and we’ve gone 
deeper and deeper on each job. 
Essentially, we realized that we’d been offering 
a one-size-fits-none service. The initial price felt 
high because no customer needed everything we 
were selling. 
How did that change work out? Our conversion 
rate has increased, since prospects can now buy 
just the piece of the site that suits their initial job, 
and we’re able to establish multiple points of sale 
across client organizations, since there is now a 
logical path for relationship growth.
Doing Jobs for B2B Customers
HBR.ORG
September 2016 Harvard Business Review 61
KNOW YOUR CUSTOMERS’ “JOBS TO BE DONE”


--- Page 9 ---
But perhaps most important, SNHU realized that 
enrolling prospects in their first class was only the be-
ginning of doing the job. The school sets up each new 
online student with a personal adviser, who stays in 
constant contact—and notices red flags even before 
the students might. This support is far more critical 
to continuing education students than traditional 
ones, because so many obstacles in their everyday 
lives conspire against them. Haven’t checked out this 
week’s assignment by Wednesday or Thursday? Your 
adviser will touch base with you. The unit test went 
badly? You can count on a call from your adviser to 
see not only what’s going on with the class but what’s 
going on in your life. Your laptop is causing you prob-
lems? An adviser might just send you a new one. This 
unusual level of assistance is a key reason that SNHU’s 
online programs have extremely high Net Promoter 
Scores (9.6 out of 10) and a graduation rate—about 
50%—topping that of virtually every community col-
lege (and far above that of costlier, for-profit rivals, 
which have come under fire for low graduation rates).
SNHU has been open with would-be competitors, 
offering tours and visits to executives from other ed-
ucational institutions. But the experiences and pro-
cesses the university has created for online students 
would be difficult to copy. SNHU did not invent all its 
tactics. But what it has done, with laser focus, is en-
sure that its hundreds and hundreds of processes are 
tailored to the job students are hiring the school for. 
MANY ORGANIZATIONS have unwittingly designed 
innovation processes that produce inconsistent and 
disappointing outcomes. They spend time and money 
compiling data-rich models that make them masters 
of description but failures at prediction. But firms 
don’t have to continue down that path. Innovation 
can be far more predictable—and far more profitable—
if you start by identifying jobs that customers are 
struggling to get done. Without that lens, you’re 
doomed to hit-or-miss innovation. With it, you can 
leave relying on luck to your competitors. 
 

HBR Reprint R1609D 
focus. During a session with about 20 faculty mem-
bers and administrators, they charted the entire ad-
missions process on a whiteboard. “It looked like a 
schematic from a nuclear submarine!” he says. The 
team members circled all the hurdles that SNHU 
was throwing up—or not helping people overcome—
in that process. And then, one by one, they elimi-
nated those hurdles and replaced them with experi-
ences that would satisfy the job that online students 
needed to get done. Dozens of decisions came out 
of this new focus. 
Here are some key questions the team worked 
through as it redesigned SNHU’s processes:
What experiences will help customers make 
the prog­ress they’re seeking in a given circum-
stance? For older students, information about 
financial aid is critical; they need to find out if con-
tinuing their education is even possible, and time 
is of the essence. Often they’re researching options 
late at night, after a long day, when the kids have fi-
nally gone to sleep. So responding to a prospective 
student’s inquiry with a generic e‑mail 24 hours 
later would often miss the window of opportunity. 
Understanding the context, SNHU set an internal goal 
of a follow-up phone call within eight and a half min­
utes. The swift personal response makes prospective 
students much more likely to choose SNHU. 
What obstacles must be removed? Decisions 
about a prospect’s financial aid package and how 
much previous college courses would count toward 
an SNHU degree were resolved within days instead 
of weeks or months.
What are the social, emotional, and func-
tional dimensions of the job? Ads for the online 
program were completely reoriented toward later-
life learners. They attempted to resonate not just 
with the functional dimensions of the job, such as 
getting the training needed to advance in a career, 
but also with the emotional and social ones, such as 
the pride people feel in earning their degrees. One 
ad featured an SNHU bus roaming the country hand-
ing out large framed diplomas to online students 
who couldn’t be on campus for graduation. “Who 
did you get this degree for?” the voice-over asks, 
as the commercial captures glowing graduates in 
their homes. “I got it for me,” one woman says, hug-
ging her diploma. “I did this for my mom,” beams 
a 30-something man. “I did it for you, bud,” one fa-
ther says, holding back tears as his young son chirps, 
“Congratulations, Daddy!”
Clayton M. Christensen is the Kim B. Clark Professor 
at Harvard Business School. Taddy Hall is a principal 
with the Cambridge Group and the leader of Nielsen’s 
Breakthrough Innovation Project. Karen Dillon is the 
former editor of Harvard Business Review. David S. Duncan 
is a senior partner at Innosight. They are the coauthors 
of the forthcoming Competing Against Luck: The Story 
of Innovation and Customer Choice (HarperBusiness/
HarperCollins, October 2016).
62 Harvard Business Review September 2016
SPOTLIGHT ON CONSUMER INSIGHT
HBR.ORG


--- Page 10 ---
Harvard Business Review Notice of Use Restrictions, May 2009
Harvard Business Review and Harvard Business Publishing Newsletter content on
EBSCOhost is licensed for the private individual use of authorized EBSCOhost users. It is not
intended for use as assigned course material in academic institutions nor as corporate learning
or training materials in businesses. Academic licensees may not use this content in electronic
reserves, electronic course packs, persistent linking from syllabi or by any other means of
incorporating the content into course resources. Business licensees may not host this content
on learning management systems or use persistent linking or other means to incorporate the
content into learning management systems. Harvard Business Publishing will be pleased to
grant permission to make this content available through such means. For rates and permission,
contact permissions@harvardbusiness.org.
