A Framework for Targeting Banner Advertising On the Internet 
Katherine Gallagher and Jeffrey Parsons 
Faculty of Business Administration, Memorial University of Newfoundland 
{ kgallagh, jeffreyp } @morgan.ucs.mun.ca 
St. John's, NF, Canada 
A1B 3x5 
Abstract 
Constraints that limit accurate targeting of advertising in 
traditional media may not hold in cyberspace. This paper 
presents a model for @ectively and effiiently targeting 
hypermedia-based banner advertisements in an online 
information service. 
The model takes advantage of 
information technology to micro-target banner 
advertisements based on individual characteristics of users. 
A simple version of the model, which has the virtue of ease 
of development, is presented. Enhancements are also 
proposed. These require more eflort to develop, but may 
lead to even more precise targeting of advertisements. 
Implementation of this framework may benefit both online 
advertisers and online consumers. 
1. Introduction 
Cyberspace is a rapidly growing new medium for 
commerce. To date, a great deal of industry attention has 
focused on electronic transactions over the Intemet. 
Although rapid growth is predicted over the next few years 
[ 10,17,21], actual sales thus far have been only moderate: 
users appear to regard the Intemet primaxily as a source of 
product information--when it comes time to pay, they prefer 
to buy offline by more conventional means [12,14]. 
Responding to consumers' desire for information, 
businesses in large numbers have developed sites on the 
World Wide Web (WWW or Web). Most commercial Web 
sites describe the firm and its products andor services, and 
many offer opportunities for visitors to the Web site to 
provide feedback and ask for specific information. As well, 
some Web sites collect information from visitors in order to 
improve future offerings. Some sites also support ordering 
and payment. The interactive potential of Web sites is 
particularly exciting, as it facilitates relationship marketing 
and customer support, eliminating the obstacles of 
geography and time [14, 221. 
Not surprisingly, then, 
industry and scholarly research has recently focused on 
making Web sites more appealing and useful to visitors [ 131. 
However, a Web site can only be effective if current and 
prospective customers visit it. Attracting this audience is 
currently a major challenge. 
In this paper, we address the challenge of attracting a 
deked target audience to a Web site via banneradvertising. 
We propose a framework for effectively targeting banner 
advertising in an electronic marketplace in a manner that 
benefits both advertisers and consumers. 
It allows 
advertisers to reach consumers who are more likely to be 
interested in the products andor services offered by the 
company, and exposes consumers to information about 
products and services that they are likely to be interested in 
purchasing. Although the fitmework is discussed in terms 
of the Intemet, we believe it will be relevant to whatever 
form the "information superhighway" eventually assumes. 
The framework takes advantage of the capabilities afforded 
by information technology for collecting and processing data 
about users. The next section examines trends in the 
electronic marketplace. Subsequently, the current state of 
advertising in this medium is discussed. Thereafter, a 
framework for targeting banner advertising, supported by 
appropriate information technologies, is proposed. Finally, 
opportunities for further research are discussed 
2. Marketing and Advertising in an Evolving 
Electronic Marketplace 
The Intemet began in the early 1970s as a US 
government research project designed primarily for the 
needs of the military. It expanded in the 1980s to serve the 
intemational academic and research communities [19,23]. 
In the 199Os, businesses began to appear on the Internet. 
Although accurate estimates are obsolete as soon as they are 
made, it is clear that today tens of millions of people have 
access to the Internet [ 161 through over 100,000 computer 
networks in 150 countries--and the numbers continue to 
increase [ 141. Two types of developments are particularly 
noteworthy with regard to this growth. 
First, a large and ever expanding number of affluent, 
educated consumers are using the Intemet [ll]. This 
concentration of very desirable consumers has led to a surge 
in commercial interest. Prior to 1990, nodes on the Intemet 
were predominantly academic institutions. In 1990, about 
1,000 businesses had Intemet connections. By June 1995, 
over 21,000 businesses were online, and the growth in 
commercial connectivity shows no sign of slowing [8]. 
Second, the emergence of the hypermedia-based WWW, 
1060-3425f97 $10.00 0 1997 IEEE 
265 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


visit, ensuring there is 
the firm and th 
Web site and 
is as a mechanism to 
of a firm's Web site and 
define two concepts c 
exposures should there 
motivation for improvin 
arises from recent eve 
based on the numbe 
pressure online services 
The estimate cited 
the attraction effective 
that only 1-2% of e 
audience members usin 
this group. However, si 
together with point-and-clic multimedia interfaces such as 
Netscape, have greatly increased usability of the Internet for 
persons without extensive computer training. 
The 
development of "applet" technology, such as Java, which 
allows programs to run on a variety of platforms, increases 
the transparency of various Intemet services. In other 
words, as technology continues to evolve, it is no longer an 
obstacle to, but an enabler of, electronic commerce. 
In this environment, companies are seeking ways to use 
the Internet effectively [ 1,3, 13, 221. One active area in 
electronic commerce involves using the Intemet as a 
medium to communicate persuasive product and service 
information via advertisements. These take various forms, 
the most common of which are corporate Web sites and 
banner advertising. We define a banner advertisement as: 
paid communication (via text, graphics, video and/or 
audio) of information about an organization and/or its 
products and services 
by an identified sponsor 
embedded within, and visually distinct from, 
with hypermedia links to the sponsor's Web site. 
information provided by an online service 
We distinguish banne 
from simple hypermedia 
links (paid or not) 
ial Web sites: banner 
advertising conveys a message even 
follow the link; simple links can only 
the user follows the link. Banner advertisements are also 
distinct from what [14] refer to as "flat ads," single page 
advertisements that do not contain hypemedia links. In this 
paper, we restrict our discussion to banner advertising that 
appears in the course of users' browsing and searching 
activities on information services, such as Yahoo! 
( h t t p : / / w w w . y a h o o . c o m )  a n d  E x c i t e  
(http://www.excite.com), that provide an entry point to 
Intemet resources. 
Appendix 1 shows a banner 
advertisements by the Saturn automobile company. 
Scant attention has been paid to banner advertising by 
researchers. This may be because banners seem relatively 
insignificant, especially when compared with the interactive 
richness of Web sites. Technical specifications for banner 
advertisements severely limit creative options and preclude 
any consumer-fm interaction beyond the consumer's 
selection of the hypermedia link to the associated Web site 
(Excite, for instance, specifies that "all banners are 468x60 
pixels, gif format only, maximum file size is 7k" [9]). 
Banner advertisements are, however, very important and 
interesting when viewed as part of a system that converts 
browsers and searchers into Web site visitors and, 
ultimately, customers. In their model of this conversion 
process, Berthon, Pitt and Watson [3] identify a sequence of 
tasks. First, users must be made aware of the Web site, then 
they must be attracted to and locate the site. Once users 
have found the Web site, the task is to tum that hit into a 
266 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


precisely targeting advertisements based on characteristics 
and behavior of individual users of information services. 
Moreover, such targeting can be more precise than the 
targeting possible in traditional media. For example, visitors 
to a "Travel" page on an information service may be good 
targets for an advertisement for discount airfares, as would 
readers of the Travel section of a newspaper. But the fact 
that the online visitors have made a series of decisions and 
taken a series of actions (Le., selecting only a subset of 
highlighted links within a hierarchical menu of categories) 
to reach the Travel page, rather than some other page (e.g., 
the Home Decorating page) suggests they may have a 
greater interest in travel than, say, readers who 
unintentionally come upon the Travel section of a 
newspaper and decide to read it. Since thke exposures are 
more likely to be target audience members, attraction 
effectiveness can be improved. Targeting individual users 
strategy should also lead to fewer wasted exposures, since 
the advertisement would not be shown to users who have not 
reached the Travel page, thereby improving attraction 
effectiveness. (See Appendix 2 for a similar example.) 
At present, targeting of banner advertising does not 
always occur. 
For example, Appendix 3 shows an 
advertisement for Honda that appeared when Organic 
Gardening was selected from a hierarchical menu of 
categories. People interested in organic gardening may not 
be the best prospects for automobiles, as they are likely to be 
more environmentally sensitive than the general population 
and may feel that cars unnecessarily harm the environment. 
Nevertheless, online information services do currently 
provide some targeting capability. As of August 1996, both 
Yahoo! [24] andExcite [9] offered advertisers three options: 
general rotation, geographic or content targeting, and 
keyword-based targeting. With "general rotation," banner 
advertisements rotate randomly through user searches and 
browsing on the site. The Honda advertisement that 
appeared on the Organic Gardening page in Appendix 3 was 
probably in general rotation. Restricted rotations permit 
advertisers to purchase space in specified content areas or by 
geographic region. For example, financial institutions can 
limit the exposure of their banner advertisements to users 
searching or browsing Business categories, and Canadian 
advertisers can choose to have their banner advertisements 
shown only to users who are searching or browsing in the 
Yahoo! Canada site. These two options are analogous to the 
targeting offered by traditional media such as newspapers, 
magazines, television, and radio [4]. 
The third option, keyword-based targeting, makes greater 
use of the targeting potential of information services. A 
company can buy keywords so that whenever a user enters 
one of those keywords during a search, she will be exposed 
to the company's banner advertisement. This ensures that 
the banner advertisement is presented only to people with a 
demonstrated interest in the area. For instance, a marketer 
of golf equipment might buy the keyword "golf." Every 
time a user enters "golf' in a search, a banner advertisement 
for the equipment would appear. This is analogous to the 
more precise targeting provided by magazines. 
While these are useful strategies, they fail to take full 
advantage of the targeting potential of banner advertising. 
Current technology provides the capability to develop 
sophisticated and detailed profiles of individual users of 
information services based on individual characteristics and 
past patterns of behavior in using the information service. 
The next section proposes and describes informally two 
versions of a model for targeting banner advertising by using 
the information technology on which an online information 
service is built. 
3. A Model for Targeted Advertising 
In traditional media, the quality of the information 
available constrains an advertiser's ability to target 
advertising effectively and efficiently. For example, many 
media buying decisions are based on data provided by 
research bureaus such as the Audit Bureau of Circulations 
(ABC), Business Publication Audit of Circulation (BPA), 
Arbitron, and A.C. Nielsen, which collect data on the 
demographics and media habits of consumers, and 
sometimes on product usage and brands [4]. These survey 
data are cross-tabulated to develop a profile of the audience 
of each media vehicle. The audience profile is then 
compared to the target audience profile identified by the 
advertiser to determine where there is a good match. For 
instance, an automobile manufacturer might identify the 
target audience for an advertisement for a particular model 
of car as middle-income females, 18 to 34, with busy 
lifestyles. Based on research bureau data, as well as the 
experience and judgement of the media planner, media 
vehicles with good reach in that demographic group would 
be chosen. Realistically, though, this type of targeting is 
usually very approximate. For instance, no matter how well 
the media vehicle audience profile matches the target 
audience profile, it is liiely that only a portion of the 
audience would be in the market for a new car. 
Online banner advertising may be able to overcome this 
problem. It is possible to target users very precisely because 
data can remain associated with individuals, so advertisers 
can select exactly the users to whom they wish their 
advertising to be exposed. It may be possible, for example, 
to identify which users will be in the market for a new car in 
a particular year. The remainder of this section describes 
two versions of a model for targeting banner advertising by 
taking advantage of the technological capabilities of the 
online environment. 
The model is designed to be 
appropriate for use by information services which sell 
26 7 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


advertising space. 
3.1. Basic version 
The basic version of the model requires that users be 
assigned unique identifiers (e.g., user accounts) when they 
fist connect to the information service. Subsequently, they 
provide these identifiers each time they connect. Users also 
complete an online questionnaire the fist time they use the 
information service. 
(Incentives to complete the 
questionnaire may be provided by informing users that the 
information will be used to filter out advertising for products 
in which they are likely not to be interested.) The 
questionnaire allows data to be collected on several 
dimensions, including: (1) demographii attributes such as 
geographic location, inc 
family lifecycle stage, 
occupation, and sex; (2) 
graphic attributes such as 
travel patterns and hobbie 
) product and brand usage 
attributes. This element of the basic model permits a banner 
advertisement to be directed to users (and only those users) 
who fit certain criteria, assuming data were collected on 
relevant attributes. For instance, a banner advertisement for 
baby strollers could reach parents of children under five 
years old--and only individuals in that group. 
In contrast, research bureau data uses demographic 
correlates (e.g., male 
, 18 to 34) to identify 
media vehicles that a 
ely large proportion of 
the people in the iden& 
mographic group [41. The 
media vehicles thus c 
s members of the target 
group (e.g., older parents) and reach consumers not in the 
target group (e.g., people who are between 18 and 34 but do 
not have young children). Even audience data based on 
cross-tabulations, while they supply information on more 
variables, still cannot isolate individuals who are in the 
target audience. (For example, research bureau data may 
advertiser to identify a magazine whose audience 
a large number of people between 18 and 34 who 
have young children, but there will still be some readers who 
are not in the target market.) 
e second element of the basic model involves eliciting 
et audience profile from advertisers. An advertiser 
can specify a target audience using any number of attributes 
about which data have been collected. These can be 
expressed conjunctively and/or disjunctively. For example, 
a specification may indicate that an advertisement is to be 
presented to all users who (1) have household incomes over 
$50,000, and (2) either work in a job that involves travel at 
least four times per year or have travelled on vacation in at 
least four of the past five years. 
In this version of our model, the questionnaire 
determines the data collected about each user. The content 
of the questionnaire will vary depending on the nature of the 
information service, expected users, and expected 
advertisers. Howe 
some subset of 
advertisements ass 
advertisements. 
users are not d 
advertisers are assu 
target audience profile. 
audience profdes, an 
advertisements 
also benefit, sinc 
3.2. Enhanced V 
The basic ver 
compIeting a ques 
information serv 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


questionnaire strategy is that it is subject to two potential 
types of bias. First, the questionnaire designer will want to 
identify as many user attributes relevant to potential 
advertisers as possible. 
As the number of attributes 
increases, so does the length of the questionnaire, crating 
the possibility of higher mortality in completing the 
questionnaire (especially since it may be more difficult to 
induce users to complete it because they are both physically 
and psychologically remote), thereby increasing the 
potential nonresponse bias [7]. Second, the questionnaire 
method is plagued with well-known problems, such as errors 
due to inaccurate recall, telescoping, social desirability 
concems, and cognitive biases, as well as ambiguity, 
intimidation, confusion, and incomprehensibility [2]. 
In view of these potential problems, ii is appropiate to 
enhance the model so that it does not rely on user self- 
reports, can accommodate changing user characteristics and 
preferences, and is less constrained by the choice of 
questions. Fortunately, information technology may provide 
assistance in each of these areas. 
Current technology allows aconsiderable amount of data 
about user search activities (both deliberate search and 
browsing) to be collected unobtrusively and analyzed to 
determine pattems. (We are dealing here only with the 
capabilities of the technology, not with the ethical issues 
such capabilities raise. However, we recognize that ethical 
issues must be considered explicitly in the design of systems 
based on our model. For instance, we believe users should 
be aware that such information may be collected, and how 
it may be used, and consent to this activity before using an 
information service.) In the enhanced model, we propose 
that patterns of search and browsing behavior exhibited by 
users while using an information service determine which 
advertisements are shown to that user during current or 
future sessions. In the remainder of this section, we provide 
a general overview of this approach. 
As before, this model relies on assigning a unique 
identifier to each user for recording herhis searching and 
browsing activities while using the information service. 
Each session constitutes a "record", consisting of data such 
as: sites visited in order; pattern of navigation through a 
hierarchical category structure (as in Yahoo!); choice of 
search t e m  in keyword-based searches: and reaction to 
previously exposed targeted banner advertisements (e.g., 
which linked Web sites are selected and visited by the user 
and which ones ignored). The aggregate of such records for 
each user provides a profile from which preferences can be 
implicitly generated. As a simple example, if a user has 
made several searches using keywords such as "Atlantic 
salmon'' and "fly fishing", and has visited the site of the 
A n g l i n g  C l u b  L a x - a  o f  I c e l a n d  
(http://www.ismennt.is/fyr-stoMax-a/uk/angl-uk.html), 
she may be targeted for a banner advertisement for a fishing 
lodge in Alaska. However, if a user has previously been 
exposed to the same or similar banner advertisements but 
has not visited linked Web sites when there was an 
opportunity to do so, she may not be shown these banner 
advertisements in future. 
This version of the model has the advantage of 
transparency. A user simply visits a service for whatever 
purpose she has in mind. Data are collected unobtrusively 
in the course of the visit. Moreover, the data reflect actual 
user behavior, rather than attitudes, intentions, or reported 
behavior captured through a questionnaire. Hence, the 
quality of data derived from user behavior should be 
superior to that of questionnaire data, for purposes of 
targeting advertisements. 
A disadvantage of this model is the preparatory work 
involved on two fronts. First, it is not clear how to structure 
the data collectedduring visits so that useful information can 
easily be coded for storage and later extraction. Research is 
needed to develop useful and efficient coding mechanisms 
for storing such data as sequences of visits and search terms 
used. We expect this can be handled using conventional 
database structures such as relations (tables); however, the 
design of a relational database for this purpose is itself a 
distinct research issue. Second, the ability to store the 
required data does not necessarily mean useful information 
can be extracted from it. Further research is required to 
determine the types of analyses that yield insights into user 
characteristics and preferences hidden in the data. 
The enhanced model should be used in conjunction with 
the basic model. A questionnaire may be very effective for 
identifying various demographic data relevant to advertisers 
but impossible to ascertain simply from users' online search 
and browsing behavior. However, since demographic data 
has limitations for effectively targeting consumers of most 
products, the enhanced model of data collection may yield 
complementary data on preferences from pattems of online 
search and browsing behavior. 
The next section describes an implementation 
architecture for the basic version of the model. Extensions 
that support the enhanced version of the model remain as 
future research. 
4. An Implementation Architecture 
The architecture required to implement the basic version 
of the model consists of two parts: data structure to 
represent user profiles and target audience profiles, and an 
algorithm to select banner advertisements to display to a 
user. This section describes these components. 
269 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


4.1. Data Structure 
To target banner advertisements, two types of profdes 
are needed: profiles describing users of the information 
service; and profiles describing the target audience for 
advertisements, as defined by advertisers. Each profile can 
be modeled as a set of attributes. 
We assume there is a finite "universe" of attributes, A 
= <al,...,*>, thathay potentially characterize users or target 
audience members. 
4.1.1. User Profile. Each user, ui, of the service can be 
described by arecord consisting of values of the universe of 
attributes, R, = <ai(&) ,..., a&)>, 
where &uJ (n=l, ..., N) 
denotes the value of attribute a,, for user'&. This may be 
implemented in a relational database in which a table is 
defined whose primary key is a user identifier, and 
remaining attributes are those in A. Each row in the table 
contains the profile of one user. (A more elaborate data 
structure is needed to support the enhanced model, since 
data must also be kept about the pattem of behavior of a 
user over one or more sessions.) All attributes need not be 
applicable or relevant to a particular user; hence, null values 
are permitted. 
A simple example serves to illustrate this stnrcture. 
Consider a universe consisting of three attributes: age, 
income, and number of dependents. Suppose there are two 
users of a service. When those users have completed a 
profile questionnaire, the resulting data may be stored in a 
relational table as: 
USER 
usex-id age 
income 
dependents 
U1 
26 
34000 
0 
u2 
45 
54000 
2 
4.1.2. Target Audience Profile. A target audience profile 
is associated with each banner advertisement. A profile may 
be expressed as: 
(1) A characterization of an "ideal" target audience 
member. 
Such an ideal can be described by a record consisting of 
values of the universe of attributes, T, = <th ..., tN>, where 
t, (n=l,-..,N) is a specific value of attribute an. Some 
values may be null, indicating that any values of those 
attributes are permitted for the ideal; and/or a 
(2) A characterization of the 'bcceptable " target audience. 
Generally, an advertiser is interested in reaching those 
within specified ranges of the attributes of interest. 
Given N attributes of interest, acceptability can be 
thought of as a region in N-dimensional space. This 
region can be defined by specifying ranges of acceptable 
values for various attributes in the universe. 
ombinations of 
Note that "distance" 
whose profiles fall w 
identifier for the 
attributes are those 
TARGET 
advertisement, the ide 
two-dimensional spac 
range, the necessary 
table whoserows desc 
a lower and an u 
$30,000. Such profiles 
270 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


RANGE 
ad-id 
attribute 
lower upper 
T1 age 
20 
50 
Tl income 
40000 60000 
T2 age 
20 
30 
T2 income 
20000 30000 
In this case, the acceptable profile can be depicted as a 
region in two-dimensional space. Figure 2 shows the profile 
for TI. 
It is possible that both ideal and acceptable profiles could 
be generated by the same advertiser. By overlaying Figures 
1 and 2, shown in Figure 3, we note that the ideal point need 
not lie at the geometric center of the acceptable region. 
+ + - H - + m  
1
0
2
0
3
0
4
0
5
0
 
hane 
1004) 
4 - t t - H -  
1
0
2
0
3
0
4
0
5
0
 
To handle measures of "distance" from an ideal, ranges of 
values on relevant attributes canbe replaced with advertiser- 
specified information about the acceptable distributions of 
values over attributes. For instance, an advertiser may 
specify a mean (ideal) and standard deviation for an attribute 
if "acceptability" is normally distributed about a central 
value. Other measures of central tendency and dispersion 
may be appropriate for attributes in which the range of 
acceptability is quantified differently. The data structure of 
the RANGE table can be modified to accommodate this 
additional complexity. 
4.2. Selecting Advertisements for Users 
The primary challenge in effectively and efficiently 
targeting banner advertising is matching user profiles with 
target audience profiles, Figure 4 uses a data flow diagram 
to depict the matching process described below. 
When a registered user visits an information service, 
hisher profile is retrieved. This profile is then compared 
with the target audience profiles of banner advertisements 
currently being run by the information service. Each target 
audience profile is associated with a banner advertisement. 
For each target audience profile, if there is no match with 
the user profile, the associated advertisement is dropped 
fiom further consideration. 
After the comparisons are completed, a set of matched 
target audience profiles fiom a variety of advertisers 
remains. If this set is small, it may be feasible to show all 
the associated banner advertisements to the user during the 
session. In general, though, it will be necessary to select 
some subset of advertisements from the matched set to 
display to the user. We envision that the advertisers whose 
advertisements are in the matched set will compete for the 
opportunity to have their banner advertisements displayed 
to the user. 
The concept of acceptable regions in target audience 
profiles provides a basis for competition. 
Profiles 
accommodate the possibility that some users withii the 
region of acceptability may be more desirable to an 
advertiser than others. Hence, a distance metric capturing 
the relative desirability of a user with respect to an ideal 
profile is possible. It is not the purpose of this paper to 
propose or evaluate mettics. However, recognizing a notion 
of distance allows the possibility for advertisers to "bid for 
the opportunity to display an advertisement to a user. Such 
bids would be determined by the advertiser, based on 
variables such as the user profile (to determine the distance 
from the ideal target audience profile) and advertising 
budget. It may be feasible to automate this by having 
software agents associated with each advertisement that 
would calculate the distance measure for the user and 
formulate a bid based on this, in addition to other 
271 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


information such as whether the user had seen this 
thiscriterion. So, thes 
advertisement, or other advertisements for the same or 
retrieved. Sincetheus 
similar products, in previous sessions (information which 
could be carried as part of the user profile). 
advertisement corres 
When bids are received, 
beranked. The banner 
advertisement correspondin 
winning bid is displayed 
to the user. 
Other advertisements may be displayed 
advertisement 
according to their ranking if there is an opportunity to 
(34000) is gre 
display additional advertisements (e.g., if the user engages 
in 
in several search or browse activities during a session). 
This architecture provides guidance for implementing 
she 
the basic version of the model. We present next a simple 
example showing how the architecture operates. 
ur would entail a cost 
4.3. Example 
Consider the relational database tables USER, 
TARGET, and RANGE presented earlier. Suppose first that 
the user with profile u1 connects to the information service. 
the profile TI. (Note 
This user’s profile, consisting of the database record <ut, 26, 
example do not s 
34000,0> is retrieved from the USER table. Next, target 
audience profiles TI and Tnare retrieved from the TARGET 
table. These identifiers determine the attributes whose 
since the income 
profile ranges have to be selected from the RANGE table. 
of income for T2 
Next, the age range for Ti, namely (20,30), is retrieved from 
RANGE. Since the age value of u1 is 26, there is a match on 
272 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


This example does not show the full scope of the model, 
since there is no case where there are two or more target 
audience profiles that match a particular user profile. To 
illustrate this, consider an additional target audience profile 
having only the condition that user income must be at least 
5oooO. This profile would require adding the following 
record to the RANGE table: <p3, income, 5oo00, - >. Now 
if the user with profile uz connects to the information 
service, a match with both Tz 
and T3 will be found In this 
case, the advertisers (or software agents) responsible for T2 
and T3 will be contacted and provided with the profile 112. 
Each advertiser (agent) will prepare a bid indicating how 
much it is willing to pay to have the banner advertisement 
comsponding to its profile exposed to the user with profile 
uz. These bids are compiled and retumed Wtbe information 
service, where they are ranlred. If we allow that the user 
will be shown only one advertisement, the one which placed 
the highest bid will be chosen. 
In summary, this model makes use of rich, multiattribute 
data at the individual user level in determining whether each 
one will be exposed to a particular banner advertisement. 
This leads to more effective and efficient targeting than is 
possible using strategies such as general rotation, which 
does not use data at the individual level, and restricted 
rotation or keyword search, which rely on only a single data 
item about an individual in determining which banner 
advertisement(s) to ptesent to the user. It is also more 
effective and efficient than targeting in the traditional media, 
which does not use any data at the individual level. 
5. Future Research 
This paper has presented a framework for leveraging 
information technology to target online banner advertising 
more effectively to benefit both users (who would be 
exposed only to advertising that is very probably of interest 
to them) and advertisers (whose advertisements would reach 
only those users who fit the target audience profile). This 
framework is, however, merely a starting point. Additional 
research on several fronts is needed before its potential can 
be realized. Several specific research concems have already 
been noted. In addition, there are more general issues. 
First, a system supporting the basic version of the model, 
based on the implementation architecture presented in this 
paper, should be implemented. 
Second, aa implementation supporting the enhanced 
version of the model is needed. This will require research to 
develop a more sophisticated database structure that can 
preserve users' searching and browsing behavior over time. 
In addition, techniques for detecting patterns of behavior are 
needed. 
Third, both theoretical and empirical research is needed 
to explore agent bidding in the context of the framework 
proposed in this paper. 
Fourth, empirical work needs to be done to evaluate the 
relative effectiveness and efficiency of this framework. A 
priority should be to compare the (1) the basic version of the 
model, (2) the enhanced version of the model, and (3) 
existing approaches to targeting advertisements. 
For 
instance, it would be interesting to test whether placing a 
banner advertisement on a relevant page (e.g., an 
advertisement for a new movie on the Entertainment page of 
an information service) would be more or less effective than 
directing the same advertisement to individual users selected 
on the basis of their answers to a questionnaire (i.e., the 
simple version of the model) or their search and browsing 
behavior (i.e., the enhanced version of the model). 
Finally, the utility of this framework in other online 
contexts should be investigated. For instance, this approach 
could be used in developing Web sites that are more useful 
to visitors. 
Visitors with different profiles could 
automatically be shown different pages more likely to be of 
interest to them, eliminating the need for them to search the 
Web site for the information they desire. 
6. Conclusion 
Cyberspace is a new medium for advertising. In 1994, 
Edwin Artzt, chairman of Procter & Gamble, the largest 
advertiser in the United States, warned advertising agencies 
to "get their interactive act together" [6, p. 751. As the 
advertisements in Appendices 1 and 3 show, even major 
advertisers and their agencies may not be taking full 
advantage of the opportunity to target their online banner 
advertising. The information technology that makes the 
WWW possible also allows the unobtrusive collection of 
detailed information about user interests based on their 
online searching and browsing. Advertisers should not 
assume that the same constraints that make media planning 
in traditional media a very inexact science also apply to 
online advertising. 
7. References 
1. Armstrong, Arthur and John Hagel I11 (1996), "The Real Value 
of On-line Communities," Haward Business Review 74(3), 
134-141. 
2. Barnes, James G. (1991), Research for Marketing Decision 
Making. Toronto, ON: McGraw-Hill Ryerson. 
3. Berthon, Pierre, Leyland E Pin, and Richard T. Watson 
(1996). "The World Wide Web as an Advertising Medium: 
Toward an Understanding of Conversion Efficiency," Journal 
of Advertising Research 36( 1). 43-54. 
4. Bovh, Courtland L., John V. Thiil, George P. Dovel, and 
Marian Burke Wood (1995). Advertising Excellence. New 
York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
5 .  Business Week, June 3,1996,44. 
6. Castro, Janice (1995). "Just Click to Buy," Time, Spring, 74- 
273 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
75. 
Churchill, Gilbert A. (1991), M 
Methodological Foundations, Fifth Edition. Orlando, FL: 
Dryden. 
Cortese, Amy (1995), "Cyberspace: Crafting Software 
that Will Let you Build a Business Out there," Business 
Week (February 27), 78-86. 
Excite 
(1996), 
Excite 
Advertising 
Rate 
Card. 
[http://www .excite. com/info/advertising .html] 
Greenwald, John (1995), "Battle for Remote Control" 
TIME Special Issue: Welcome to Cyberspace (Spring), 
Gupta, Sunil and Jim Rtkow (1995a), "Consumer Survey 
of WWW Users: 
Preliminary Results from the Third 
Survey," University of Michigan Business School. 
[http://www.umich.edul -sgupta/hermes] ' 
Gupta, Sunil and Jim Pitkow (1995b), "Consumer Survey 
of WWW Users: Preliminary Results from the Fourth 
Survey," University of Michigan Business School. 
bttp: //www .umich. edul - sgupta/hermes] 
Hoffman, Donna L. and Thomas P. Novak (1996), 
"Marketing 
in 
Hypermedia 
Computer-Mediated 
Environments: 
Conceptual Foundations ," Journal of 
Marketing 60(3), 50-68. 
Hoffman, Donna L., Thomas P. Novak, and Patrali 
Chatterjee (1995), "Commercial Scenarios for the Web: 
Opportunities and Challenges, " Journal of Computer- 
, Special Issue on Electronic 
71-73. 
[http : //shun. huji . ac .ilijcmc/voll /ksue3/hoffman.html] 
Information Week, "One-to-one Marketing Made Easy", 
Information Week, December 18, 1995, 110. 
Kahn, Robert E, (1994), "The Role of Government in the 
Evolution of the Intemet," Communications of the ACM 
Karlgaard, Rich (1995), "Bozo Explosion," Forbes ASAP 
(December 4), 9. 
Landau, Susan, Stephe 
Kent, Clint Brooks, Scott 
Charney, Dorothy Denning, Whitfield Diffe, Anthony 
Lauck, Douglas Miller, Peter Neumann, and David Sobel 
(1994), "Crypt0 Policy Perspectives," Communications of 
the ACM 37(8), 115-121. 
Leiner, Barry M. (1994), "Internet Technology," 
Communications of the ACM 37(8), 32. 
Ottawa Citizen, April 29, 1996, A10. 
Press, Larry (1994), "Commercialization of the Internet," 
Communications of the ACM 37(11), 17-21. 
Quelch, John A. and Lisa R. KIein (1996), "The Internet 
and International Marketing, " Sloan Management Review 
Tetzeli, Rick (1994), "The Internet and Your Business," 
Fortune 129 (March 7), 86 
Yahoo! (1996), Sponso 
Program Opportunities 
Fttp: //www .yahoo .com/docslpr/adop. html] 
37(8), 15-19. 
37(3), 60-75. 
8. Appen 
274 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet. Downloaded on December 13,2021 at 23:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
