--- Page 1 ---
Review
Review of the theoretical underpinnings of loyalty programs
Conor M. Henderson ⁎, Joshua T. Beck, Robert W. Palmatier
Department of Business Administration, Foster School of Business, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Received 1 December 2010; revised 1 February 2011; accepted 16 February 2011
Available online 21 March 2011
Abstract
A review of the extant literature reveals that the theoretical underpinnings of the majority of loyalty program research rest on psychological
mechanisms from three specific domains—status, habit, and relational. We propose that to understand how loyalty programs actually work, a
broader, more holistic research perspective is needed to account for the simultaneous effects across these three theoretical domains as well as both
cross-customer and temporal effects. The contribution of this approach is a fresh research agenda advanced in 15 research propositions.
© 2011 Society for Consumer Psychology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Loyalty programs; Status; Habit; Relationship; Relationship marketing
Contents
Loyalty programs: broadening the research perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Theoretical underpinnings to loyalty programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
Status as a loyalty-inducing mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Conceptualization of status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Role of status as a source of consumer loyalty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Cross-customer effects of status-based loyalty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
Temporal effects of status-based loyalty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
Habits as a loyalty-inducing mechanism. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
Conceptualization of habit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
Role of habit as a source of consumer loyalty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
Cross-customer effects of habit-based loyalty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265
Temporal effects of habit-based loyalty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265
Relationships as a loyalty-inducing mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
Conceptualization of relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
Role of relationships as a source of consumer loyalty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267
Cross-customer effects of relational-based loyalty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
Temporal effects of relational-based loyalty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
Simultaneous effects of multiple loyalty-inducing mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Marketing, Foster School of Business, University of Washington, PACCAR Hall, Box 353226, 4295 E. Stevens Way NE,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
E-mail addresses: cloydhen@uw.edu (C.M. Henderson), jtbeck@uw.edu (J.T. Beck), palmatrw@uw.edu (R.W. Palmatier).
273
1057-7408/$ - see front matter © 2011 Society for Consumer Psychology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jcps.2011.02.007
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276
Journal of
CONSUMER
PSYCHOLOGY


--- Page 2 ---
Loyalty programs, both in practice and as a focus of
consumer research, have become popular over the past decade,
but the financial impact of these efforts rarely meets expecta-
tions (Dowling & Uncles, 1997; Ferguson & Hlavinka, 2007).
Marketing literature substantiates the marginal effectiveness of
some loyalty programs (e.g., Leenheer, van Heerde, Bijmolt, &
Smidts, 2007), with articles referring to current conceptualiza-
tions as “shams” (Shugan, 2005, p. 185); nevertheless,
consumers tend to enroll in droves. In the United States, loyalty
program participation has topped 1.3 billion, with the average
household subscribing to 12 separate programs (Ferguson &
Hlavinka, 2007). Firms spend well over $1 billion rewarding
these “polygamous” consumers (Dowling & Uncles, 1997, p. 6;
Wagner, Hennig-Thurau, & Rudolph, 2009), and it is no
surprise that the abysmal performance of many loyalty
programs ultimately results in their abolition (Nunes & Dréze,
2006). Because many loyalty programs fail to perform as
expected, a new approach may be needed. This article addresses
this need by reviewing the extant literature on loyalty programs
with the objective of providing researchers new perspectives for
understanding the effectiveness of loyalty programs.
Loyalty programs: broadening the research perspective
Specifically, we propose that the research lens focused on
loyalty programs should be broadened to account for three
important features of these programs. First, most programs
simultaneously engage multiple psychological mechanisms,
while research often uses a one-dimensional theoretical lens.
For example, Dréze and Nunes (2009) investigate the structure
of loyalty programs using just a status perspective, and
Rosenbaum, Ostrom, and Kuntze (2005) examine loyalty
programs from only a relationship perspective. Although
focusing on a single theoretical mechanism supports experi-
mental design parsimony and the academic review process, it
may not capture the “full effects” of most loyalty programs,
which often concurrently tap multiple psychological processes.
For example, Leenheer et al. (2007) recommend that managers
implement delayed reward programs and promote the benefits
of these programs to nonmember, low-volume customers.
Without considering the impact on habit-based loyalty, which
may not be effective in a delayed benefit scheme, or status-
based loyalty, which may be undermined when benefits are also
allocated to nonmember, low-volume consumers, Leenheer et
al. risk delivering harmful advice.
Loyalty programs often tap into more than one mental or
social process at any given time. For example, a program might
confer a special sense of status, enhance customer feelings of
social belonging, build gratitude, promote reciprocation, or
deliver a combination of these benefits (De Wulf, Odekerken-
Schröder, & Iacobucci, 2001; Morales, 2005; O'Brien & Jones,
1995). Not only can multiple loyalty-inducing mechanisms
(e.g., status, habit, relational) operate concurrently in an
additive manner, but different mechanisms may also interact
in a multiplicative manner. Consider a consumer who now
habitually orders all his or her books from an online retailer after
being exposed to a sequence of targeted monthly e-mails. The
retailer then launches a status-based VIP program in which the
consumer gains points for every purchase with an accompa-
nying rewards summary each month. Providing the consumer
recognition and rewards for purchases should improve loyalty,
but how does this new program interact with the consumer's
habit-based purchase behavior? Research has shown that habits
weaken and become more vulnerable when instrumentality of
behavior is made salient (Wood & Neal, 2009). By rewarding
and reporting purchases, the firm increases the “instrumental-
ity” of the purchase behavior, which in turn can undermine the
positive linkage between habits and purchases. After the habit is
disrupted, the consumer now “thinks” about the next book
purchase and decides to shop around to make sure the online
retailer provides the best benefits available. Thus, future loyalty
program research should be broadened to account for the
simultaneous effects of multiple theoretical mechanisms
because many programs trigger concurrent psychological
responses.
Second, although loyalty programs affect multiple consu-
mers, they are typically studied solely on the basis of their effect
on the focal or target consumer without accounting for the
program's potential cross-customer effects (Darke & Dahl,
2003; Feinberg, Krishna, & Zhang, 2002). For example, Alaska
Airlines' flight attendants hand out free-drink coupons to
“premium” customers flying in coach without accounting for
how this program might affect surrounding passengers. While
the impact of this program on premium customers may be
positive, the benefits could be offset by the potential negative
effects due to feelings of unfairness or inferior status among
surrounding passengers who observe the “premium customer”
receiving a reward. For example, Barone and Roy (2010a)
investigate consumers' reactions to exclusive promotions
without considering the impact of these deals on excluded
customers. Furthermore, research indicates that consumers
enjoy shopping socially (Arnold & Reynolds, 2003) and that
shopping with companions influences purchase behaviors, such
as impulse buying (Luo, 2005); yet these cross-customer
loyalty-enhancing relational mechanisms are relatively under-
explored (Rosenbaum et al., 2005). Thus, future loyalty
program research should be broadened to account for cross-
customer effects because many programs influence non-targeted
consumers.
Third, the effects of loyalty programs develop over multiple
periods or are in some way time dependent, but programs are
often evaluated at a single point in time without accounting for
any temporal effects (Lewis, 2004; Liu, 2007). For example,
providing consumers discount coupons initially offers the
functional benefit of a lower price, which may lead to habit-
based loyalty over time, but it can also generate feelings of
gratitude and a need to reciprocate and thus lead to relational-
based loyalty in the long run (Morales, 2005; Palmatier, Jarvis,
Bechkoff, & Kardes, 2009). However, to determine the overall
influence of a coupon-based rewards program, each of the three
temporally dependent effects (i.e., functional, habit, and
relational) must be considered. A short-term time horizon
may be weighted toward the impact of the price discount, while
the benefits of habit-based loyalty may emerge only when the
257
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 3 ---
consumer receives many coupons in a compressed period;
relational-based loyalty may only be detectable over longer time
horizons. Because most loyalty program are evaluated at a
single point in time, the results either fail to account for any
temporal effects or are biased toward the loyalty-inducing
mechanism most salient at that time. Likewise, Ashworth,
Darke, and Schaller (2005) examine the immediate social
consequences of discount incentives, even though the effects of
“feeling cheap” may diminish over time as the effect of
purchase habits increases. In a different context, Howard (1992)
examines, as an immediate reaction, the mood-lifting effects of
complimentary services without examining how these services
may help build long-term relationships. Thus, future loyalty
program research should be broadened to account for temporal
effects because the effectiveness of many programs is time
dependent.
In summary, we suggest that additional work is needed to
truly understand loyalty programs. That is, a broader, more
holistic research perspective is needed to account for (1)
simultaneous effects of multiple theoretical mechanisms, (2)
cross-customer effects, and (3) temporal effects.
Theoretical underpinnings to loyalty programs
The term “loyalty program” captures a variety of marketing
initiatives, including reward cards, gifts, tiered service levels,
dedicated support contacts, and other methods that positively
influence consumers' attitudes and behaviors toward the brand
or firm. Some of these programs provide a price discount or
short-term financial incentive, which enhances the economic
utility of the offering by compensating consumers for higher
volume or more frequent purchases. The effect of price
discounts on purchase volume is well known and even
represents the core positioning of some firms (e.g., Wal-
Mart); however, we exclude pure “economic utility” as a
theoretical underpinning of loyalty programs herein for three
major reasons. First, from a theoretical standpoint and
consistent with previous research (Dick & Basu, 1994, p. 101;
Oliver, 1999), “true” loyalty must move beyond special pricing
“deals” and require some underlying psychological mechanism
to increase the consumer's inherent preference for or propensity
toward a brand or firm. For example, even if a price discount is
recast as a “customer reward or loyalty program,” which
generates sales solely due to elasticities in price, it does not
directly generate many of the enduring benefits attributed to
“true loyalty” because consumers will readily switch when a
competitor offers a better deal (Dick & Basu, 1994).
Second, from a business standpoint, generating sales by
decreasing price often negatively influences a firm's profit, can
damage the brand, and can be easily matched by competitors
(Raghubir, 2004). Firms are more interested in loyalty programs
that tap consumers' underlying psychological processes leading
to repeat and more frequent purchases, in addition to increasing
switching barriers and reducing price sensitivity (Kumar &
Shah, 2004; Nunes & Dréze, 2006).
Third, from a pragmatic standpoint, reviewing the large body
of literature on pricing and promotional programs is beyond the
scope of this article (Liu & Soman, 2008). Therefore, we do not
consider the short-term effects of price elasticity as a loyalty-
inducing mechanism; however, we do include the longer-term
benefits of habituation or relationship building resulting from
discount-induced purchase behaviors as a critical component of
some loyalty programs. For example, in a cell phone context,
Johnson, Herrmann, and Huber (2006) show that perceived
value drives consumer purchase intentions early in a relation-
ship, but as time progresses, relational factors become more
important. Consistent with this logic, we define a loyalty
program as any institutionalized incentive system that attempts
to enhance consumers' consumption behavior over time beyond
the direct effects of changes to the price or the core offering (see
the Appendix for a summary of construct definitions relevant to
loyalty program research).
Paralleling the logic that decouples the functional utility of
price discounts from true loyalty, most extant literature ignores
the impact of loyalty programs on consumer satisfaction.
Consumer satisfaction, defined as a consumer's post-consump-
tion belief that the consumed product or service provided a
pleasurable fulfillment of their preconsumption needs and
benefits (Oliver 1999), generally focuses on consumers'
evaluation of the core offering or unique attributes of competing
offerings (Houston, Sherman, & Baker, 1991; Oliver, 1980).
Satisfied consumers do not always become loyal consumers,
partly because loyalty requires more than a great core offering
or specific product attributes (Oliver, 1999), thus loyalty
programs often try to build binding ties from sources beyond
those in the core offering. Thus, satisfaction research typically
focuses on the influence of the core offering (i.e., price/product)
on behavior while loyalty program research focuses on
augmenting the core offering to influence behavior beyond
the effects of consumer satisfaction. Consistent with this logic
the few empirical papers that include satisfaction in their
evaluation of loyalty program's effectiveness model satisfaction
as an independent driver of loyalty not as a mediator of its effect
on performance (Mägi, 2003; Verhoef, 2003).
With our loyalty program definition in mind, a review of the
extant marketing literature reveals that the theoretical under-
pinnings of the majority of loyalty program research rest on
psychological mechanisms from three specific domains: status,
habit, and relational. Specifically, we argue that loyalty program–
induced change to consumer behaviors typically results from (1)
conferring status to consumers, which generates favorable
comparisons with others; (2) building habits, which causes
advantageous memory processes; and (3) developing relation-
ships, which results in more favorable treatment by consumers.
For each domain (status, habit, relational), we review the
underlying psychological theories, describe how each loyalty-
inducing mechanism affects consumer behaviors, and summa-
rize applicable research findings as they relate to loyalty
programs. In addition, to advance our understanding of loyalty
program effectiveness and provide direction for future research,
we develop specific propositions by applying a broadened
research perspective to each domain by investigating the role of
both cross-customer and temporal effects. Finally, we discuss
how the simultaneous effects of loyalty-inducing mechanisms
258
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 4 ---
from each domain may work together to help or hurt the overall
effectiveness of loyalty programs.
Status as a loyalty-inducing mechanism
Conceptualization of status
The allure of status is profound. Humans are drawn to status-
based systems and charmed by opportunities to elevate their
status within those systems, which makes the success of status-
based marketing no surprise (Heffetz & Frank, 2011).
Consumers with high status enjoy “prominence, respect, and
influence” (Anderson, Srivastava, Beer, Spataro, & Chatman,
2006, p. 1094); however, their high status may also evoke envy
and hostility in other lower-status consumers. Research shows
that some consumers even feel schadenfreude, or feelings of
delight, when the high status of others is compromised (Sundie,
Ward, Beal, Chin, & Geiger-Oneto, 2009). Griskevicius, Tybur,
and Van den Berg (2010) argue that the huge popularity gap
between public transportation (low status) and the Toyota Prius
(high status) is due to the role of status in signaling both the
users' altruism and their purchasing power. Thus, marketers
often design loyalty programs to tap into consumers' strong
desire for status (Drèze & Nunes, 2009; Kumar & Shah, 2004).
Status receives widespread attention across many domains in
academia; however, three common components emerge across
all areas: the positional nature of status, the desirability of status,
and the dependence of status on social context (Heffetz &
Frank, 2011). First, status is positional in that it ranks
individuals within a hierarchical structure, reflecting asymme-
tries in status conferral in which certain people are high and
others are low in status. Thus, a gain in status for one is often a
loss in status for another (Anderson, John, Keltner, & Kring,
2001; Heffetz & Frank, 2011). Within these hierarchies, there is
an important distinction between local and global status; local
status refers to an individual's position within a group, and
global status refers to the group's position within the greater
social structure. A person may trade local for global status by
relinquishing a higher-status position in a lower-status group
and taking a lower-status position in a higher-status group
(Heffetz & Frank, 2011). For example, a traveler who
frequently stays at Comfort Suites might have earned
“Diamond” status in Choice Hotels' loyalty program but
could decide to give up this “high” local status to gain global
status by joining the lowest tier of Hyatt's “Gold Passport”
loyalty program. Following this exchange of local for global
status, the consumer's loyalty would shift from Comfort Suites
to Hyatt.
Second, elevated status is desirable because it provides
access to personal benefits (Griskevicius et al., 2010). These
benefits include physical resources, better reputation, higher
earnings, wider selection of romantic partners, improved
cooperation, and greater control over others (Anderson et al.,
2006; Griskevicius et al., 2010; Heffetz & Frank, 2011). Thus,
status is a “universal human motive” (Anderson et al., 2001, p.
116). Surprisingly, research shows that people seek status even
if it serves no instrumental value, which may stem from the
effects of status on well-being, esteem, affect, and social
cognition (Anderson et al., 2006; Drèze & Nunes, 2009). In this
sense, status is both a means to an end and an end in itself,
which provide marketers a “free” motivator of consumer choice.
Third, status conferral, though individually desirable, is
often dependent on the social context that shapes it (Drèze &
Nunes, 2009; Heffetz & Frank, 2011). Consumers perceive their
status in accordance with either achievements recognized by
socially accepted norms or esteem received directly from others
(Tiedens, 2001; Van Prooijen, Van den Bos, & Wilke, 2002).
For example, a person who privately succeeds in accomplishing
a valued task (e.g., passing the bar exam) may feel a sense of
elevated status without anyone knowing about the accomplish-
ment. Conversely, a person might respond to his or her alma
mater's fundraising campaign and receive elevated status
through the praise and respect from others when the school
rewards the person with a plaque on the “wall of donors”
(Harbaugh, 1998). Thus, status attainment depends on the
combination of consumers' internal and external perceptions
(Anderson et al., 2001).
Role of status as a source of consumer loyalty
Elevated status, conferred to consumers as part of a seller's
marketing efforts, can motivate consumers to behave loyally.
Socially relevant stimuli are often stronger tools for motivating
behavior than purely economic- or ethical-based stimuli (Bateson,
Nettle, & Roberts, 2006). Table 1 summarizes marketing literature
that uses “status” as a theoretical rationale for increasing consumer
loyalty. Desire for status motivates conspicuous consumption, or
the purchase of particularly luxurious or altruistic goods
(Griskevicius et al., 2010; Han, Nunes, & Drèze, 2010).
Advertisers evoke status motives or in-group favoritism in
targeted advertising to elicit better responses (Grier & Deshpandé,
2001). When consumers have low power, they are more willing to
spend for status-related goods (Rucker & Galinsky, 2008). The
use of coupons may signal low purchasing power and thus can
hurt status in such a way that consumers are more likely to use
coupons if they are privately delivered (Ashworth et al., 2005).
Theories in social psychology help explain the status phenomenon
with important implications for using status as a loyalty-inducing
mechanism, such as social comparison theory (Festinger, 1954),
social identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1979), and Schwartz's
value theory (Schwartz & Bilsky, 1990).
Social comparison theory indicates that humans naturally
compare themselves with others (Festinger, 1954; Roccas,
2003). Relative rankings determined from social comparisons
require observable actions and characteristics for formation.
Therefore, labels assigned in loyalty programs can serve as
observable indicators of status (Drèze & Nunes, 2009).
According to signaling theory, signals that require resources
(e.g., time, energy, money) can communicate a person's status.
Loyalty programs could provide such a signal. Work in
evolutionary biology has shown that costly signals, which
confer status, are naturally respected because of an “evolution-
ary social cognition” and are rewarded with better access to
259
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 5 ---
potential reproduction partners (Griskevicius et al., 2010, p.
400; Wright, 1997).
Social comparisons help explain the relative nature of status,
as people are motivated to perceive themselves “as not merely
good and worthy” but “as better than other groups” (Festinger,
1954; Roccas, 2003, p. 726). People make social comparisons
upward, downward, and laterally to form evaluations, and from
these comparisons, the perceptions of status ranking can have
Table 1
Status-based loyalty research.
Reference
Context
Key constructs
Major findings
Ashworth et al., 2005
Restaurant
first date
Discount, social
attraction,
self-perception
Redeeming discounts in a social context creates personal feelings of cheapness and
decreased ratings of attractiveness by others, with context and attribution playing
important roles. Thus, participation in loyalty programs can signal status.
Barone & Roy, 2010a, 2010b
Retail
invitations
Exclusivity,
self-enhancement,
identification
Exclusivity of a deal invitation enhanced desirability, mediated by
self-enhancement. Need for uniqueness and group membership positively moderated
this relationship. Some consumers prefer that everyone is treated equally.
Darke & Dahl, 2003
Retail
discounts
Pricing, fairness,
equity theory,
social cues
Consumers' evaluations of the fairness of prices, and thus satisfaction, will depend
on equity considerations when discounts are provided to some customers
(high status regular customers vs. spurious customers) but not to others.
Drèze & Nunes, 2009
Retail,
hospitality
Status, program
structure, status
laden colors
The number of hierarchical levels in a status program positively influences
perceptions of status, as well as preference for the program. The majority of
consumers, even those conferred low status, prefer loyalty programs containing
multiple status levels.
Griskevicius et al., 2010
"Green"
products
Status motives,
product
preference,
costly signals
Status motives increase desirability of conspicuously consumed, expensive,
"green" products. Green products signal a consumer's ability to incur costs and
altruism. Altruism signal may protect consumers from envy, as humans reward
prosocial behavior with status. Expensive green products were preferred over
luxury products.
Han et al., 2010
Luxury
fashion
Logo
prominence,
reference groups,
need for status
Some consumers want to fit in with a high-status group, while others want to stand
out from the low-status group. "Parvenus" use prominent brand displays to
dissociate from "poseurs" and "proletarians." "Patricians" use subtle brands to
signal to each other.
Kim et. al., 2009
Retail
department
store
VIP membership,
purchase history,
commitment
Consumers' reaction to a VIP program introduction was mixed. Of consumers given
VIP status, those who were previously the heaviest buyers reacted negatively
(decrease in purchase frequency ), but those who were lighter buyers reacted
positively. Attitudinal commitment moderated these results.
Kivetz & Simonson, 2003
Retail
loyalty
programs
Loyalty program
idiosyncratic fit
Consumers prefer loyalty programs in which they have a relative advantage in
obtaining benefits compared with the average consumer. Relative advantage is
more important than overall value or personal ease.
Kumar & Shah, 2004
Loyalty
programs
Behavioral and
attitudinal
loyalty,
consumer goals
Using one rewards plan for all consumers is suboptimal. Instead, loyalty programs
should provide a baseline level of rewards to all, aimed to help consumers meet
lower-level, short-term, tangible goals and secretly reward targeted customers with
benefits that help them achieve higher-level, aspirational goals.
Lacey, Suh, & Morgan, 2007
Upscale
department
store chain
Loyalty program,
status, relational
outcomes
Consumers' perceptions of receiving preferential treatment increased with the
higher status conferred through a retailer's loyalty program. Preferential treatment
perceptions were positively related to relational outcomes (e.g. commitment, revenue ).
Sundie et al., 2009
Luxury car
failure
Status, envy,
schadenfreude,
negative
outcomes
Bystander consumers may react negatively (envious and hostile) to others'
conspicuous consumption of status laden products. If the product is tainted
(mechanical failure), bystander consumers may feel schadenfreude
(joy in others suffering) with costly brand consequences
(poor attitudes and negative word of mouth ).
Wagner et al., 2009
Airline,
retail firms
Status, locus of
control, affect,
seller apology
Customer demotion, or loss of benefits, associated with a tiered loyalty program
results in decreased loyalty, attenuated by meaningful apologies from the firm and
perceptions of locus of control (fault).
Note. These loyalty relevant studies examined the impact of status on a number of relevant outcome variables. We emphasize these different dependent variables by
formatting each outcome with italics.
260
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 6 ---
important consequences (Drèze & Nunes, 2009). Upward social
comparisons serve to motivate people toward greater achieve-
ment (Johnson & Stapel, 2007; Romero-Canyas, Downey,
Reddy, Rodriguez, Cavanaugh, & Pelayo, 2010), lateral
comparisons allow people to “fit in” with a prestigious group,
and downward comparisons provide a mechanism for self-
enhancement by differentiating people from less prestigious
groups (Han et al., 2010). Loyalty programs that confer status
on consumers (e.g., elitism, prestige, superiority) often fail to
consider all the different types of comparisons consumers make,
which could undermine a program's effectiveness depending on
consumer characteristics and the specific social context. For
example, when status-based loyalty programs restructure to add
additional tiers, consumers' emotional reaction is positive if the
tier added is of lower status but negative if the tier is of greater
status, even when their objective benefits remain constant
(Drèze & Nunes, 2009).
P1. Loyalty programs will increase status-based loyalty when
(a) the social context makes status conferrals relevant, (b) the
multiple types (upward, lateral, downwards) of social compar-
isons concurrently create feelings of aspiration, belonging, and
superiority, across consumers, and (c) consumers' perceive that
the status conferrals are merited.
Social identity theory suggests that people's need to bolster
their self-image motivates their desire to belong to or associate
with a high-status group (increase their global status) (Roccas,
2003; Tajfel & Turner, 1979). The positive illusion perspective
allows people to distort status-relevant information as an
attempt to bolster their self-esteem, but such inflations can
actually lead to less social acceptance in some cases (Anderson
et al., 2006; Barkow, 1975). Therefore, loyalty programs that
help consumers avoid such problems by providing a third-party
signal of consumer status should benefit (Kim, Lee, Bu, & Lee,
2009). Drèze and Nunes (2009) show that the number and size
of tiers in a program's structure influence consumers' percep-
tions of status and feeling special and, consequently, their
preference for the program. They find that consumers prefer
status when it is more exclusive and when there are more tiers
below them; in addition, status-signaling labels (e.g., “gold”
tier) help support perceptions of exclusivity and status. The
greater the number of tiers below their tier, and the smaller the
high-status tiers, the more consumers can make social
comparisons with lower tiers that allow them to enhance the
self and feel special. Some people are so disposed to strive for
status that they seek out or construct particular social
environments in which they will enjoy higher status (Anderson
et al., 2001, p. 118). Such people are likely to be highly
responsive to particular consumer environments in which they
will have high local status even if their global status suffers.
Kivetz and Simonson (2003) show that consumers prefer a
loyalty program in which they are more likely to achieve
rewards than other customers.
Not every consumer prefers elevated status or special
treatment all the time, and some consumers prefer firms with
a status-based loyalty system even when it puts them in the
lowest-status group (Barone & Roy, 2010a, 2010b; Drèze &
Nunes, 2009). Schwartz's value theory helps provide insight
into these paradoxical findings by describing a person's desire
for getting ahead (self-enhancement) versus getting along (self-
transcendence) (Roccas, 2003; Schwartz & Bilsky, 1990).
People with an independent construal tend to react positively to
opportunities that enhance their local status, while those with an
interdependent construal are more concerned with group
harmony and advancing the group, and thus they may only be
sensitive to global status enhancements (Barone & Roy, 2010a).
A consumer's desire for self-enhancement and status is
heterogeneous—for example, people with low testosterone
levels, and people with an interdependent self-construal are less
likely to seek status and exclusive benefits, may feel
uncomfortable when given status enhancements, and are likely
to prefer shared over individual benefits (Josephs, Sellers,
Newman, & Mehta, 2006; Mosquera, Parrott, & de Mendoza,
2010). Thus, consumers with an interdependent self-construal
may actually avoid firms that elevate them through “red carpet
treatment.”
P2. Loyalty programs will increase status-based loyalty when
consumers (a) are offered both local and global status conferrals
and (b) can easily opt out of local status conferrals.
Several findings suggest that consumers' reactions to status
are complex and that the simple notion that consumers'
preference for elevated status will motivate loyal behavior
toward the firms that confer them high status is overly
simplified. In general, consumers prefer to be given high status
and receive exclusive deals; however, some consumers prefer
all consumers to be treated similarly (Barone & Roy, 2010a,
2010b; Lacey et al., 2007). Moreover, the positive benefits from
a conferral of status to one consumer may be offset by the envy
and hostility felt by other consumers or temporally as a
consumer loses status over time (Sundie et al., 2009; Wagner
et al., 2009). Therefore, it is important to understand status as a
source of loyalty from a broader perspective that considers both
cross-customer and temporal effects.
Cross-customer effects of status-based loyalty
Status programs build on consumers' natural propensity to
make social comparisons; however, some programs may
unfairly, in the minds of consumers, confer a lower status to
some consumers. The very idea of status triggers concern about
fairness (Van Prooijen et al., 2002). According to equity theory,
people compare their ratios of inputs to outcomes with others'
ratios to make assessments about the distributive justice
associated with who received what and the procedural justice
associated with how it was received (Adams, 1965; Van
Prooijen et al., 2002). These perceptions are important. When
conferred a lower status than expected, a person may think the
outcome is unfair (distributive injustice) or think the process
used to confer status is unfair (procedural injustice) (Feinberg
et al., 2002). In either case, a negative reaction is likely to hinder
efforts by firms that use status to enhance performance. In
business relationships, perceived unfairness can act as
261
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 7 ---
“relationship poison” by motivating customers to try to punish
the seller and by aggravating the negative effects of existing
conflict (Samaha, Palmatier, & Dant, 2011).
In addition, consumers with lower status may feel envious of
high-status customers. Envy seems to be a relevant, but possibly
underexplored, concept in consumer emotions because it is
“evoked by others' status-linked products” (Sundie et al., 2009,
p. 356). Envy can motivate consumers to want to “level-up”
and achieve the same status as those they envy or hope other
consumers “level-down” and lose their high status (Van de Ven,
Zeelenberg, & Pieters, 2009). If a lower-status consumer aspires
to level-up, the firm may benefit from the consumer's actions;
however, other consumers who already have high status could
feel diminished status because having more consumers in high-
status tiers reduces local status and the feelings of exclusivity and
being special (Drèze & Nunes, 2009). If a lower-status consumer
feels hostility toward high-status consumers and decides to level-
down by finding a competitor company devoid of a status
hierarchy, this would also dampen the focal company's sales.
P3. Loyalty programs will reduce non-targeted consumers'
status-based loyalty when status conferrals (a) are perceived as
being unfairly allocated, and (b) result in some perceived cost
(e.g., status or service degradation) to non-targeted consumers.
Temporal effects of status-based loyalty
Status construction theory suggests that humans interacting
over time have an innate tendency to relate socially visible
characteristics to abilities and access to resources, thereby
creating status beliefs tied to these characteristics (Ridgeway,
2006). Status beliefs are then used as heuristics that guide
expectations and decisions. Status beliefs and their associated
linkages to nominal characteristics spread through the popula-
tion of consumers through a diffusion process, in which one
person with a status belief shares that belief with another, and so
on (Mark, Smith‐Lovin, & Ridgeway, 2009).
A specific consumer's status in loyalty programs is not static
but can increase or decrease over time because of changes in his
or her own behavior, changes in how the program status
hierarchy is structured, and changes caused by the diffusion of
status beliefs across other consumers. Gaining status can help
motivate a consumer to increase behavioral loyalty (Kim et al.,
2009; Lacey et al., 2007). However, consistent with prospect
theory, research on loss aversion, and the endowment effect,
which postulate that people are more sensitive to losses than
gains (Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, 1990; Zhang & Fishbach,
2005), the decrease in loyalty as status is lost is often larger than
the loyalty gained as status increases. Research shows that the
“final loyalty” is lower for consumers that gain and then lose
status than for those that never obtain elevated status at all
(Wagner et al., 2009). However, sellers can attenuate the
damaging effect of demotion within a loyalty program hierarchy
with an apology or by persuading consumers to attribute their
self as the locus of control behind the loss in status.
P4. Loyalty programs' effectiveness in building status-based
loyalty increase when (a) status beliefs quickly diffuse across
consumers, and (b) structural or rule changes to programs do not
withdraw or dilute status.
Habits as a loyalty-inducing mechanism
Conceptualization of habit
Intuitively, a consumer's automated proclivity to repeatedly
purchase a company's offering is appealing to marketers. A
strong habit increases a person's propensity to perform the
supported behavior over competing alternative behaviors
(Tobias, 2009). Existentially, anyone struggling to kick a
habit can testify to its strength. However, not all consumer
habits support loyal behaviors, such as a married couple's habit
to patronize whichever restaurant the local paper reviews.
Research shows that loyalty programs can cause consumers to
engage in recursive purchases, which may lead to the
development of habitual consumption, further increasing
consumer purchases (Lewis, 2004; Wood & Neal, 2009).
What is a consumer habit? Habit captures the phenomenon
of an actor's memory-based tendency to perform a particular
behavior given previous experience performing the behavior in
similar contexts. Theoretical explanations of this phenomenon
often draw from the dual-mode model of mental processing.
This model distinguishes a deliberative type of processing that
is rational, effortful, and analytic from an automatic type of
processing that is experiential, effortless, and holistic (see
Novak & Hoffman, 2009; Smith & DeCoster, 2000). As
behavior repeats over time, people decreasingly employ
deliberative processing to form intentions and increasingly
rely on automatic decision making (Ajzen, 2002; Wood & Neal,
2007). Habits benefit actors by allowing them to perform well-
learned behaviors efficiently with minimal awareness, facilitat-
ing the simultaneous execution of additional behaviors. Because
habit selection is essentially effortless, people find it difficult to
suppress habitual behaviors or engage in alternative behaviors
(break a habit) because doing so requires costly deliberative
processing and the cognitive resources necessary to form or
recall less familiar competing intentions (Tobias, 2009;
Verplanken, 2006; Verplanken & Wood, 2006).
In the habit literature, debate exists about the theoretical role
of intentions in guiding habitual behaviors. According to the
habituation perspective, when mature, habits fully replace
intentions as the guiding force behind behavioral performance,
with contextual cues directly cuing behavior without mediating
cognitions (Ji & Wood, 2007; Wood & Neal, 2007, 2009).
According to the reasoned action perspective, intentions never
fully dissipate. They may be stored and later become
spontaneously activated (i.e., not consciously reconceived),
but they always mediate the relationship between contextual
cues and behavior (Ajzen, 2002). Another potentially reconcil-
ing possibility, according to Tobias (2009), who draws on
prospective memory research, is that all behaviors are at some
level intended, but habitual behaviors are easier to remember
and more likely to be performed than competing behavioral
intentions, even if they are preferred. In summary, the
competing perspectives differ with regard to how intentions
262
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 8 ---
support habitual behavior, but they agree that habits alleviate an
actor from the need to deliberately form intentions, and “the
implications … are quite similar” (Ajzen, 2002, p. 108).
In addition, habits as context-specific, slow-to-form, resis-
tant-to-change behavioral memory advantages often work in
conjunction with other frequency-based cognitive mechanisms
that increase a person's preference for the recurring behavior
(Ajzen, 2002; Labroo & Nielsen, 2010; Wood & Neal, 2007).
For example, when a person is repeatedly exposed to a
particular stimulus, that stimulus will be preferred to novel
stimuli because of an affective response—that is, a mere
familiarity effect (Labroo, Dhar, & Schwarz, 2008). Cognitive
lock-in is a quick-to-form consequence of learning investments
that creates cognitive switching costs (Murray & Häubl, 2007).
In addition, introspection about previous behavior can affect
preferences for subsequent action (i.e., “I did it before; it must
be what I like.”). While familiarity effects, cognitive lock-in,
and introspection all involve experience with a particular
behavior and could have immediate effects on loyalty, habits are
slower to form and influence “the behavior selection via
memory processes” (Tobias, 2009, p. 412), which have longer-
term effects on consumer behaviors.
Role of habit as a source of consumer loyalty
Habit is “a new but booming topic” (Tobias, 2009, p. 415)
that has been an “undervalued concept in consumer research”
and “only indirectly incorporated into models of consumer
behavior” (Verplanken, 2008, p. 125). Yet researchers have
observed habit's powerful inertia effects on behavior in several
consumer domains (Ji & Wood, 2007; Wood & Neal, 2009).
Research in consumer psychology ties habit to behavioral
outcomes (e.g., loyalty [Labroo & Nielsen, 2010], purchase
probability [Breivik & Thorbjørnsen, 2008]), indirectly to
product preference (Murray & Häubl, 2007), and to diminished
search for alternatives (Verplanken & Wood, 2006). Table 2
summarizes marketing literature that uses “habit” as the
theoretical rationale for explaining consumer loyalty.
Three primary antecedents that are critical to understanding the
effectiveness of habit-based loyalty programs are necessary for
habit formation: intention, repetition, and context stability. First, a
novel behavior has no initial advantage over other competing
behaviors. Therefore, an actor must create an intention to behave
before he or she will perform that behavior (Ajzen, 2002; Wood &
Neal, 2007). When performed, the behavior must be repeated so
that memory advantages of a habit can develop; thus, the behavior
must be rewarding enough to sustain the supporting intention.
Loyalty programs can promote such repetition (Wood & Neal,
2009), and “promoting ones loyalty program will … activate a
loyalty construal among current customers” which supports
consistency in brand choice instead of variety seeking (Fishbach,
Ratner, & Zhang, 2011, p. 10).
Second, repetition of behavior is a necessary but not
sufficient driver of habit formation. While loyalty programs
encourage repeat purchases using rewards or discounts in a
similar manner as positive reinforcements are used in operant
condition (Redish, Jensen, Johnson, & Kurth-Nelson 2007;
Skinner 1974), the linkage between a program characteristic and
the underlying mechanism is often difficult to isolate. For
example, Wood and Neal (2009) propose that a perceived
instrumental contingency between behavior and reward inhibits
habit formation. They suggest that loyalty incentives should not
hinge directly on the behavior, which echoes research showing
that goal priming interferes with behavioral habituation (Neal,
Wood, & Pascoe, 2008). Though not directly tested, their
assertion is tangentially supported by Kivetz, Urminsky, and
Zheng (2006), who study goal progression. These authors find
that use of a “frequent purchase-type” loyalty card that uses hole
punches to signal goal progression (e.g., toward a free drink)
accelerated purchase frequency when the goal was near,
suggesting that the goal, and not a well-formed habit, was the
basis for the repeated purchases. However, the impact of goals
did not necessarily imply that habit formation was inhibited
among these consumers but rather that habits did not account
for the acceleration in purchases, as the program could have
helped develop habits that drive a baseline level of purchases.
Acceleration toward the reward positively predicted retention in
the reward program and a faster reengagement in the program,
which cannot be explained simply by the goal gradient because
the distance to the reward was reset.
Wood and Neal (2009, p. 586) suggest that “if it is true that
habits are not experienced as contingent on outcomes, then
habitual consumers will be little affected by an increase in rewards
for their behaviors.” Assuming that frequency of a buyer's
purchases is an appropriate indicator of habit strength, as support
for this claim, Wood and Neal point to Liu's (2007) finding that in
response to a newly implemented loyalty program, consumers
with low initial purchase rates increased their purchases, but
consumers with high initial purchase rates did not significantly
alter their behavior. However, customers with very high share of
wallet may be poor targets for evaluating a reward program's
effectiveness because they may be less able to increase their
purchases further (Du, Kamakura, & Mela, 2007; Kumar & Shah,
2004). Nonetheless, it is worth considering how an incentive-
based loyalty program can encourage repetition without creating
instrumental contingencies.
The reinforcement schedules studied in operant conditioning
may shed light on this issue. Actors learn desired responses
fastest if a reinforcement is provided after each desired
performance (continuous schedule); however if reinforcements
cease (extinction) actors continue performing the desired
response longer if reinforcements were provided after every
nth response (fixed-ratio partial reinforcement schedule) or, to
an even greater extent, after random responses (variable-ratio
partial reinforcement schedule) (Redish et al., 2007; Skinner
1974). It is unclear if this greater resistance to extinction is due
to actors building strong habits that support the response despite
the utility from the response decreasing; or as scholars studying
reinforcement based learning suggest, actors may simply adjust
their expectations for reinforcements at a slower rate when
reinforcements were provided less frequently and randomly
(Redish et al., 2007).
Wood and Neal (2009) suggest the rewards be distributed in
a way that does not create an idiomatic “carrot and stick” to
263
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 9 ---
drive behavior. They propose that the bottle cap rewards some
soft drink campaigns use (similar to instant scratch lottery
ticket) that provide a small but random chance to win a reward is
a good example of a habit-friendly program. Conversely,
randomness of incentives could suppress habit formation. The
memory advantage habits provide is strongest in consistent
contexts, and thus context-based interruptions provide an
opportunity for consumers and marketers to break habits or
establish new ones (Neal et al., 2008; Verplanken & Wood,
2006). The variability and surprise of “random” rewards
heighten consumers' cognitive emotional responses (e.g.,
gratitude) (Palmatier et al., 2009; Valenzuela, Mellers, &
Strebel, 2010) and may fail to provide the contextual stability
necessary for automatic processing and habits to take over (Ji &
Wood, 2007; Tobias, 2009). Overall, further work resolving the
role of incentives and repetition promotion is needed. For
example, when repetition generates a habit, what aspects of
loyalty programs promote habit maintenance, and can programs
be designed to wean consumers off the reward incentive after
habituation?
Third, habit development requires context stability to ingrain
a behavior in procedural memory (Verplanken, 2008). Habits
are built by consistently and repeatedly performing a behavior
in the context of certain stable environmental factors so that a
strong association in the “slow-learning procedural memory
system” can link environmental cues with the behavior (Quinn,
Table 2
Habit-based loyalty research.
Reference
Context
Key constructs
Major findings
Breivik & Thorbjørnsen, 2008 Online brand
communities
Consumer-brand
relationship, habit strength
Indicators of habit strength predicted repurchase likelihood beyond that of
commonly used measures of relationship strength or quality. The impact of habits
increases with frequently bought or consumed categories.
Fishbach et al., 2011
Sequential
product choice
Consistency vs.
variety seeking,
mental construal
Nonconscious support of behavioral selection consistency increases when
consumers are primed with concepts of loyalty, but concepts related to satiation
(boredom) promote variety seeking. Loyalty programs may prime consistent
behavior and support the development of habitual loyalty.
Ji & Wood, 2007
Restaurant,
media, and commute
Habit strength, intentions Repeated behaviors predicted subsequent behavior in a fast-food, TV, and
transportation setting, even in light of opposing intentions. Intentions predicted
behavior when behavior repetition was low—a proxy for weak habits.
Kivetz et al., 2006
Café patrons,
Internet users
Goal-gradient
effect,
persistence,
loyalty program
reengagement
Consumers accelerate effort, persistence, and behavior frequency when
approaching a loyalty reward. The acceleration cannot be explained by habit but
may help build a baseline habit. After receiving a reward, consumer effort
decreased, but not to the original level, and acceleration positively predicts
program reengagement and loyalty. The goal-gradient effect does not directly
account for this effect as the goal distance resets.
Murray & Häubl, 2007
Online Web
search
Repetition,
product
preference, ease
of use, goal
activation
Product preferences are shaped by prior experience with the product. This
relationship is mediated by ease of use. Goals associated with product use
moderated the relationship between experience and preference, with consumers
preferring experienced products only when ease of use was high. Therefore, habits
can indirectly affect preferences supporting ease of use and brand loyalty.
Tobias, 2009
Recycling
campaign
Accessibility,
behavior,
commitment,
habit strength
Habits provide a strong memory advantage over competing behaviors. Intention
accessibility decays as habits develop but is enhanced by reminders. Reminders'
positive impact on accessibility is positively moderated by behavior commitment.
Reminder's potency increases with proximity to behavior context, but its salience
decreases with exposure.
Verplanken & Wood, 2006
Fast food and
commute
Habit change,
environmental
change
Habit change is easiest when environmental context is altered or disrupted.
Informational campaigns to help consumers break habits will be most effective
when the habit performance context is tumultuous.
Wood, 2010
Retail, restaurant
Life change,
familiarity, habit
performance
Despite actors' predictions about others' behaviors, people in states of high life
change tended to choose unfamiliar, novel items rather than familiar, traditional
items, suggesting that life changes inhibit habit performance.
Wood & Neal, 2009
Review of
multiple studies
Habit, intentions,
self-control,
goals, rewards, context
Habits gradually form with behavior repetition in a stable context. When formed,
the context-behavior association is the strongest guide of behavior, not intentions.
Time pressures, distractions, and strained self-control resources promote habit
use. Context change supports habit change. Habits inform introspective inferences.
Salience of the behavior instrumentality may disrupt habitual support.
Note. These loyalty relevant studies examined the impact of habit on a number of relevant outcome variables. We emphasize these different dependent variables by
formatting each outcome with italics.
264
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 10 ---
Pascoe, Wood, & Neal, 2010, p. 499). Contextual factors
include physical location, preceding actions, time, mood, and
social surrounding (Ji & Wood, 2007; Tobias, 2009).
Environmental consistency is also important for sustaining
habits (Neal et al., 2008; Wood & Neal, 2009). For example,
Wood and Neal (2009) report that consumers with a strong habit
of eating movie theater popcorn consumed as much fresh as
stale popcorn in the theater setting but ate less stale popcorn in
an unfamiliar setting; alternatively, consumers with a weak
habit ate less stale than fresh popcorn in all settings. In
summary, the linkage between consumer habits and behavior is
contingent on contextual cues in which conditions that promote
automatic, effortless processing support the tendency to act on
habits.
P5. Loyalty programs will increase consumers' habit-based
loyalty when (a) both initial purchase intentions and repeated
purchases are not directly attributable to loyalty program
incentives, and (b) loyalty program reminders reinforce
contextual cues and not incentives.
Other factors, such as time pressure, cognitive load, and a
recent drain on self-control resources, also promote the use of
habits (Smith & DeCoster, 2000; Wood & Neal, 2009). For
example, people facing distractions have a diminished ability to
recall or form competing intentions and thus rely on habits
(Quinn et al., 2010; Wood & Neal, 2009). These strains on
cognitive resources, however, can be overcome. A person with
a strong commitment to behavioral change may allocate
cognitive resources toward intention recall and provide the
perseverance to carry out competing intentions in opposition to
strong habits (Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2009; Tobias, 2009).
Verplanken and Wood (2006, p. 91) provide insight into how
best to target consumers with habit-based loyalty programs;
they suggest that informational campaigns designed to change
consumer intentions “gain power when they are applied during
naturally occurring periods of change in consumers' lives.”
Similarly, consumers are more likely to break consumption
habits when their lives are in a state of flux, insofar as they are
less likely to choose comfort foods when their lives are in
transition, contradicting most lay assumptions (Wood, 2010).
P6. Consumers' likelihood of adopting new or defecting from
existing loyalty programs will be highest when consumers'
environment is turbulent (e.g. life transitions).
Marketers who use habit advantages as a means for com-
petitive advantage are likely to find that success will vary de-
pending on both product category and consumer characteristics.
Wood and Neal (2009) suggest that goals associated with certain
product categories promote or suppress consumption repetition.
For example, a consumer may repeatedly visit the same hair salon
when seeking social companionship and acceptance but consis-
tently choose different restaurants when seeking variety.
Cross-customer effects of habit-based loyalty
Consumers' social context is another factor marketers should
consider. “Social shopping” refers to consumers' desire for and
common practice of shopping with others with the primary goal
of developing and enjoying social relationships (Arnold &
Reynolds, 2003). Luo (2005) demonstrates that the social group
accompanying a consumer on shopping experience can increase
the consumer's likelihood to make impulse purchases based on
cross-customer influence. If consumers share a repeated
consumption experience, they will become associated with the
behavior in which the thought of another person can serve as a
social memory aid or contextual cue, making the shared
consumption experience more salient (Tobias, 2009).
Retailers may want to alter their loyalty programs to entice
consumers to shop together, thus building a stable social
context. Similarly, firms using buy-one-get-one-free coupons
with hopes of motivating consumers to increase purchases
might benefit from restructuring this promotion to become a
coconsumer loyalty program that rewards customers for
consuming together without the coupon. Otherwise, the coupon
could become an aspect of the habit context, and removing it
would weaken the habit.
The role of a stable social context in support of habit
formation and remembering is well documented, though not in
the context of loyalty programs; what remains to be understood,
however, is the social forces associated with potential habit
diffusion. Work on mirror neurons suggests that behaviors
unconsciously spread from one person to another (Rizzolatti &
Craighero, 2004). As habits dictate behaviors, habitual
tendencies that develop from one person's repeated behaviors
may spread to others without such intentions.
P7. Loyalty programs that promote interaction among con-
sumers will enhance habit-based loyalty for (a) targeted
consumers by providing social contextual cues that reinforce
patterns of habitual purchasing, and (b) non-targeted consumers
by means of habit diffusion, where non-targeted consumer
mirror the behaviors of targeted consumers.
Temporal effects of habit-based loyalty
Implicit in this habit discussion is the important role of time.
In general, scholars agree that habits' memory advantages
increase or decay over time depending on the frequency the
actor performs the behavior. However, actual empirical research
attempting to pinpoint the necessary pattern for a behavior to
become habitual is scant, and “information that could be found
regarding the development of the strength of habits is very
imprecise” (Tobias, 2009, p. 416). In their review of habit
formation from a neurological perspective, Yin and Knowlton
(2006, p. 475) conclude that “we remain ignorant of the detailed
mechanisms that underlie habit formation at all levels of
analysis,” and “conditions that promote habit formation have
yet to be characterized precisely.”
However, as time progresses since the last performance of a
habitual behavior, the strength of the habit's memory advantage
decays, and the required potency of salient context cues as a
reminder increases. In a study of consumer recycling behavior,
Tobias (2009) found that a reminder's effectiveness increased the
more fundamentally ingrained it was in the behavioral context.
265
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 11 ---
The salience of the reminder also diminished over time as
exposure increased; however, Tobias notes that the simultaneous
gain in habit strength may have offset the need for a reminder. By
this logic, in Liu's (2007) study, the reminder to purchase
provided by the loyalty rewards may have been unnecessary for
the frequent buyers, which could account for their lack of
response to the firm's implementation of the program.
The role of loyalty programs in reminding consumers of
contextual cues associated with habitual purchases is not
completely understood. It is plausible that the loyalty program
itself becomes a cue in the habit formation process. Under what
circumstances are these cues or reminders important? Firms
often replace or alter their loyalty program, and this could
protect the program from decreases in reminder salience due to
overexposure. However, changing the loyalty program could
also reduce habit strength by disrupting the context. Recent
studies have shown that an actor's habitual response can be
impaired with the priming of goals (Neal et al., 2008), and thus
marketers should be cautious when using a reminder that might
make the consumption goal more salient than the context.
P8. Loyalty programs' effectiveness in building habit-based
loyalty increases in situations where (a) consumers make
frequent purchases, and (b) contextual cues reinforcing the habit
are stable.
Relationships as a loyalty-inducing mechanism
Conceptualization of relationships
Consider the following scenario: when browsing the deli
section of her local grocery store, a consumer finds a great buy:
low-priced Italian sausage. With some sauce, she will have dinner
made. Luckily, a friend is there to remind her that her favorite
marinara is in aisle four. As the consumer finishes shopping, the
friend tells her about some delicious sourdough bread to
accompany dinner. The friend even helps her check out quickly
so that she can get home. This friend turns out to be Albertsons, a
national grocery chain, and the chain is using data collected as part
of a loyalty program to offer reminders, suggestions, and
efficiencies to “cement relationships” with the consumer
(Hymowitz, 2004, p. 1). Ferguson and Hlavinka (2007, p. 320)
suggest that such efforts work to build “relationship equity to
improve retention and increase customer lifetime value.”
Consumers build relationships with brands (Thomson,
MacInnis, & Park, 2005), and a benefit of loyalty programs is
that they help initiate, grow, and maintain these relationships
(De Wulf et al., 2001). Social exchange theorists propose that
three features help inform relationships (Fiske, 1992; Gerbasi,
2010): (1) the target of the relationship; (2) the relationship's
governing mechanisms; and (3) the relationship's development,
maintenance, and dissolution processes.
First, the target of the relationship can be an individual
consumer or a group of consumers, and this distinction shapes
the goals of the loyalty program. Relationship-building efforts
targeted at one consumer may negatively affect relationships
with other consumers (Feinberg et al., 2002); these cross-
customer effects could differ, however, when a relationship-
building effort is targeted at a group of consumers (Giesler,
2006). Most extant research examines the impact of “direct”
relationships between two parties, but there is a trend for
businesses to use “indirect” relationships by targeting con-
sumers' social in-group (Henderson & Palmatier, 2010). For
example, Groupon offers discounts, termed “social coupons,” to
networked consumers who show interest in a product or service
offered by another community member and rewards consumers
who pass along deals to friends (Rosman, 2010). These groups
then experience the promotion together.
Second, understanding the governing principles of the
relationship is important because these “rules” establish how
relationship partners behave toward each other. The type of
exchange—reciprocal or negotiated—often determines the
relevant governing principles (Fiske, 1992). Reciprocal
exchanges are typically socially infused relationships between
“friends” in which benefits are traded over extended periods
without a formalized accounting of benefits and costs.
Reciprocal exchanges are governed by relational norms (e.g.,
reciprocity, mutuality, solidarity, flexibility), while negotiated
exchanges are governed by contracts or formal agreements that
describe the exchange of benefits and payments (Cannon,
Achrol, & Gundlach, 2000; Homans, 1958). In negotiated
relationships, the exchange of benefit and payment usually
occurs concurrently. Loyalty programs often attempt to
transition customers from an economic-based negotiated
relationship to a more socially based reciprocal relationship
built on trust and relational norms because of the belief that
stronger relationships lead to greater performance (Palmatier,
Dant, Grewal, & Evans, 2006a). Evidence shows that firms
want to enhance personal connection; for example, Nordstrom
builds strong customer relationships by linking a specific
salesperson to a customer for personal shopping assistance and
customized communications to enhance customer loyalty
(King, 2010).
Third, researchers offer numerous “life-cycle” theories to
explain the relationship development, maintenance, and disso-
lution process (Dwyer, Schurr, & Oh, 1987; McGraw &
Tetlock, 2005). Transaction utility theory (Thaler, 1985)
suggests that a person draws utility by simply maintaining a
relationship with another person, beyond any objective benefits
provided by the exchange. Because these dyadic exchanges
occur over time, relational cohesion theory posits that strong,
structurally embedded relationships will form. These relation-
ships result from an emotion-cohesion process in which
repeated interactions between parties facilitate emotional
connections, which ultimately bond the two actors (Lawler &
Yoon, 1996). This type of relationship formation can occur
beyond the dyad, as groups of individuals interact over time.
Mackie, Devos, and Smith (2000) explain this process and offer
a theory of intergroup emotions, which suggests that members
can experience emotions vicariously through their connections
with others in their group. This becomes important when
considering concurrently consumed rewards, which suggests
that rewarding one in-group member has positive carryover
effects on other group members.
266
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 12 ---
According to social relational theory, a relationship falls into
one of four sequential categories—communal sharing, equality
matching, market pricing, or authority ranking—that at one end
resembles a close, familial tie and at the other resembles a cold,
economic transaction (Fiske, 1992). A consumer may commu-
nally share most things with a spouse, alternate paying the bill
with a lunch partner, and heavily negotiate home maintenance
services with a contractor. In these examples, the levels of
commitment, trust, and reciprocity in each relationship are very
different. Relationships based on authority ranking pertain to
Emerson's (1962) power-dependence theory, which explains the
effects of asymmetries in relational dependence. Common to both
theories is the general notion that one exchange partner has status
or power that tips the relationship in his or her favor, enabling the
partner to extract unfair value from the partnership. Perceptions of
such inequity can damage a relationship (Adams, 1965).
When these relationships are not market based but rather
close and communal, the consumer becomes attached to the
company. Thomson, MacInnis, and Park (2005) extend
Bowlby's (1979) work on attachment theory and show that
people vary in their attachment to brands. Individual differences
become important for understanding how some consumers
respond after forming a relationship with a company. For
example, firms should not form strong relationships with some
consumers, because that relationship might overly sensitize
them to negative experiences, resulting in extreme emotionally
based responses to any perceived slight or injustice (Campbell,
Simpson, Boldry, & Kashy, 2005). Thus, although building a
relationship with consumers might not always be beneficial,
research shows that, in general, strong consumer relationships
are advantageous (Palmatier et al., 2006a).
Role of relationships as a source of consumer loyalty
Relationships afford their constituents a variety of benefits.
These social blessings may stem from a basic human desire to
secure “lasting, positive, and significant personal relationships”
that are “temporally stable” (Baumeister & Leary, 1995, p. 497).
Academics in marketing have recognized this fundamental
human motivation, and researchers have attempted to under-
stand “the impact of relationship marketing tactics on
relationship quality” (De Wulf et al., 2001, p. 33). Relationship
marketing research has provided important insights, tying
consumer relationships to things such as increased revenue
(Palmatier et al., 2006a), improved share of wallet (Palmatier et
al., 2009), enhanced word of mouth (Ranaweera & Prabhu,
2003), greater likelihood to help fellow consumers (Muniz &
O'Guinn, 2001), increased information sharing (White, 2004),
and forgiveness for service failure (Goodwin, 1996). Table 3
illustrates these research efforts. Strong relationships are tied to
an ultimate loyalty that is secured by attitudinal barriers to exit
(Bansal, Irving, & Taylor, 2004), thus making the cultivation of
these relationships vital to many firms' long-term success.
Recognizing this necessity, companies are implementing
relationship-building loyalty programs to strengthen their
connections with consumers. Hyatt is a prime example; it
recently instituted gratitude-inducing rewards that help bond
consumers to a relationship through reciprocity (Walker, 2009).
Research has identified many preconditions for transitioning
consumers from mere economic transactors to relational
partners (Goodwin, 1996; Palmatier et al., 2006a). Early
experiences with a brand predicate the type of relationship
formed, communal or exchange (Aaker, Fournier, & Brasel,
2004; Aggarwal, 2004). Thus, loyalty programs attempting to
initiate a relationship must signal communal qualities, such as
personality congruence, sociability, and information transpar-
ency, ideally in an interpersonal format (Goodwin, 1996).
In addition to signaling that a firm is interested in a
communal relationship, the design of the program should
generate gratitude leading to cycles of reciprocation and,
ultimately, strong relational bonds (Palmatier et al., 2009).
When partner actions are interpreted as helpful, reciprocity
norms that are tied to an evolutionary need for cooperation
develop (Schroeder, 2010). These norms compel a person to
return benefits in kind because of feelings of gratitude that act
“as a mediator between give-and-take” (Bonnie & de Waal,
2004, p. 227). Appraisal of loyalty program benefits likely
precedes emotional response (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), and
feelings of gratitude require perceptions that a relationship
partner is acting somewhat altruistically.
Thus, reciprocity and gratitude are important drivers of
relationship formation, and these effects can be enhanced when
loyalty program benefits appear to be benevolently motivated,
given with free will, and offered when the consumer needs them
the most (Palmatier et al., 2009). Morales (2005) finds that the
extra effort store employees expend enhances consumer
willingness to pay and store loyalty. Howard (1992) similarly
demonstrates that product wrapping services elicit positive
mood, which enhances consumer attitudes and likely carries
over to post-consumption evaluation (Miniard, Bhatla, &
Sirdeshmukh, 1992). These findings mirror the type of
investments loyalty programs provide (e.g., special gifts,
increased attention from store associates, enhanced services)
and suggest that the manner in which these investments are
delivered is important to effective relationship formation.
Strong relationships form when loyalty programs seem
interested in more than a one-sided economic transaction.
However, when consumers perceive the exchange partner as
opportunistic, efforts to build a relationship will be threatened
(Adams, 1965). Company behaviors that consumers interpret as
self-interested, cunning, or unfair will cause consumers to
categorize the relationship as economic, based on market
norms; these relationships typically lack trust (Fiske, 1992).
Impaired trust may cyclically undermine the relationship;
consumers will more likely interpret behaviors associated
with the relationship negatively and experience greater
variability in their overall satisfaction with the relationship
over time (Campbell, Simpson, Boldry, & Rubin, 2010).
Consumers may participate in loyalty programs even when
they consider these programs sales tactics. The loyalty program
may encourage repeat purchases over time since rewards act as
operant reinforcements of repeat purchase behavior by
increasing the overall utility of the exchange (Lewis, 2004;
267
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 13 ---
Liu, 2007), but these repeat purchases may do little to build a
relationship. Even when consumers perceive the loyalty
program as fair, firms need to prevent the program from simply
being part of its value proposition; otherwise, the program loses
its relational dimension and just becomes a complicated pricing
discount scheme. For example, compare the response between a
Table 3
Relationship-based loyalty research.
Reference
Context
Key constructs
Major findings
Bansal et al., 2004
Auto-repair services
Normative, affective,
and continuance
commitment
Subjective norms are associated with normative commitment, while trust is tied
to affective commitment. Continuance commitment results from increased
switching costs. Normative and continuance commitment are negatively
associated with switching intentions.
De Wulf et al., 2001
Food, apparel retail
Relationship
investment, relationship
quality, loyalty
Consumers' perceptions of relationship investments enhance relationship
quality, a composite of trust, commitment, and satisfaction, which is positively
associated with behavioral loyalty. Interpersonal communication has the
strongest association with perceived relationship investment.
Giesler, 2006
Online peer-to-peer
Gift system,
reciprocity norms
A dyadic analysis of gift exchange fails to capture community development
function of gift systems, in which gifts exchanged among consumers aid in the
development of consumer relationships.
Goodwin, 1996
Services
Communality,
service delivery
Transitions to communal relationships are a function of service delivery,
consumer traits, and situational factors. Likelihood of strong relationship
formation increases with self-disclosure, time, and personality congruence in
encounters.
Howard, 1992
Retail setting
Attitude strength,
mood maintenance
Gift-wrapping cues positive mood because wrapping is frequently paired with
joyous life events. Positive mood mediates the relationship between
gift-wrapping and strength of positive attitude and thus can serve as a relationship
investment.
Marcoux, 2009
Moving to
a new home
Consumer
gifts, cooperation,
subjection
A variety of emotions are associated with accepting gifts from others, and these
emotions may spur consumers toward market-based exchanges to forgo negative
affect and relational obligations associated with accepting a gift.
McGraw & Tetlock, 2005
Various
consumer
settings
Opportunism,
relational exchange styles
Context of relational exchange influences consumers' exchange style, with
communal and equality matching conditions associated with egalitarian
exchange and market-pricing exchange related to opportunism.
Morales, 2005
Retail setting
Gratitude,
persuasion,
willingness to pay
Extra effort expended by the firm enhanced customer willingness to pay, choice of
store, and overall evaluations. Inferred persuasion motivations diminished this
relationship.
Palmatier, Gopalakrishna, &
Houston, 2006b
Business-to-business
relationship
Social, financial
structural
relationship
investments
The return on investments in relationships with customer firms is greatest if the
investment is social in nature (e.g. taking a client to dinner). Financial
investments (e.g. discounts) fail to deliver a positive return. Structural
investments (e.g. infrastructure) only pay off if interactions are frequent.
Palmatier et al., 2009
Retail and
business-to-business
relationship
Gratitude,
relationship
investments
Gratitude mediates the effect of relationship investment on performance, along
with trust and commitment. Relationship investments' effect on gratitude is
positively moderated by customers' perceptions of seller benevolence, free will,
and investment value.
Rosenbaum et al., 2005
Communal
loyalty programs
Communal benefits,
loyalty
Loyalty programs differ in terms of the extent to which they provide communal
engagement and communal benefits shared among their customers. Communal
loyalty programs elicit stronger loyalty than programs relying on financial incentives.
Thomson et al., 2005
Self-reported brands
Emotional
attachment,
brand loyalty
Brand emotional attachment is associated with three factors: brand affection,
connection, and passion. These factors are ultimately associated with stronger
brand loyalty and a higher willingness to pay.
Note. These loyalty relevant studies examined the impact of relationships on a number of relevant outcome variables. We emphasize these different dependent
variables by formatting each outcome with italics.
268
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 14 ---
consumer who reads the reward program details, collects the
miles, and then trades them in for a free trip and a consumer who
receives a free upgrade for being a “friend” of the airline.
P9. Loyalty programs will enhance relational-based loyalty (a)
when signaling the seller's desire to form a communal-type
relationship, (b) when motives are perceived as benevolent, and
(c) when rewards are discretionary; the positive impact will be
undermined if the program rules are (d) made salient to
consumers, and (e) perceived as procedurally unfair.
Not all loyalty programs are viewed as persuasion schemes
or rewards for loyal behavior. Research suggests that consumers
can interpret firms' efforts as direct investments in their
relationship (De Wulf et al., 2001). These types of investments
are qualitatively different from gifts or surprises offered in
typical reward programs in the sense that consumers understand
that the company or brand is attempting to demonstrate its
commitment to the relationship's future. This distinction may
separate the positive effects of surprise gifts or discounts
(Heilman, Nakamoto, & Rao, 2002) from the emotionally laden
impact of personalized or customized efforts targeted at a
specific consumer (Howard, 1992). The former is a reward
representing a “thank you,” and the latter is an investment
showing commitment to a future relationship.
Research also suggests that if consumers have a relationship
with an individual employee (vs. an overall company), the
impact of that relationship on consumer loyalty will be greater
(Palmatier, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 2007). Theories related to
social judgment (Hamilton & Sherman, 1996) argue that the
underlying characteristic that distinguishes perceptions of
individuals from those of companies or large social groups is
entitativity, or the degree of behavioral consistency associated
with an entity. Interactions with different individuals in a large
group—employees at a company—are generally inconsistent,
making it difficult to form a single impression of the overall
group. People therefore use recall models that heavily weight
recent experiences when thinking about a group. In contrast,
interactions with a single person tend to be stable over time,
making unified cognitive representations (online models) of
individuals easier. Slower, weaker, and less confident judg-
ments associated with recall models can be replaced with the
faster, stronger, and more confident judgments associated with
online models when a group's behavior is uniform and
consistent—when a group resembles a person (Hamilton &
Sherman, 1996).
Palmatier et al. (2007) demonstrate this process in a business
context, showing that loyalty tied to individual salespeople has
a greater effect on firm performance outcomes than loyalty tied
to the firm overall. It is easier to form a strong relationship with
an individual than a large organization. If, however, a firm's
employees appear and behave uniformly, the relationship
formed with individuals extends to the company, thereby
enhancing the bottom line. Thus, relational-based loyalty
programs that focus on building consumer–employee relation-
ships (e.g., Nordstrom's personal shopper program) may
generate better results than programs that focus on building
consumer–firm relationships, assuming employee turnover is
not an issue. Moreover, if a firm's employees behave
consistently as a group, the judgment formation process
becomes similar to the process used to evaluate individuals
(Hamilton & Sherman, 1996), therefore enhancing the effect of
consumer-firm relationships on consumer behavior.
An additional area of future inquiry involves understanding the
role of knowledge investments leading to increases in consumer
switching costs and dependence. Consumers who adopt new
products or services and expend effort and time to learn how to use
these innovations are less likely to switch companies (Johnson,
Bellman, & Lohse, 2003; Zauberman, 2003). When consumers feel
locked in to a company and its offering, they become dependent on
the firm and may want a relationship to help manage the risk
associated with the dependence (Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978).
However, research on interfirm relationships suggests that the
effect of dependence on relationship quality is contingent on the
balance of power.Ifbothparties are interdependent,therelationship
is enhanced, but if the dependence structure is asymmetric, the
relationship is damaged (Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995).
How these findings generalize to a consumer loyalty program
context is unknown.
P10. The positive impact of loyalty programs on relational-
based consumer loyalty will be enhanced as (a) perceived
entitativity increases, (b) feelings of interdependence increases,
and (c) feelings of asymmetric dependence decreases.
Cross-customer effects of relational-based loyalty
Imagine a passenger missing a flight connection and immedi-
ately walking up to a premier ticketing counter to rebook the flight.
The friendly agent finds a seat and upgrades the ticket to first class,
free of charge. Surrounding the premier passenger are others who
paid the same ticket price but are waiting in a long line and thus do
not experience this same treatment. How does the overall
effectiveness of this loyalty program change when considering
effects on both premier and nonpremier passengers?
Though limited, research suggests that betrayal, jealousy,
and unfairness that stem from targeted promotions can have
mixed effects on overall firm profitability (Feinberg et al.,
2002). For the flier being rewarded, recent work suggests that
feeling envied is associated with enhanced self-confidence and
increased fear of ill-will, suggesting that exclusive rewards can
have both positive and negative effects, even for the person
benefiting from this exclusivity (Mosquera et al., 2010). Similar
to the cross-customer effects for status-based loyalty programs,
both distributive and procedural justice perceptions can
negatively influence the non-targeted customers (Bechwati &
Morrin, 2003; Feinberg et al., 2002). For example, some
consumers may believe that if two customers pay the same price
for the service (e.g., ticket), they should be treated the same.
Beyond dyadic interactions that may affect relationships
with on-looking consumers, it is also important to consider
relationships with groups of consumers. Giesler (2006) studies
gift giving in an online peer-to-peer music sharing environment
and finds that gifts help build a relationship among groups of
consumers. How rewards consumed by a group influence that
269
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 15 ---
group's relationship with a company remains an unanswered
question. However, intergroup emotions theory posits that
positive experiences of one group member are shared
vicariously by others in the group (Mackie et al., 2000).
P11. For individuals in groups, the positive impact of loyalty
programs on relational-based loyalty will (a) strengthen when
in-group members are rewarded, even if the focal consumer
does not directly receive any benefits, and (b) decline when out-
group members are rewarded, especially if rewards are
perceived as unfair or unearned.
Temporal effects of relational-based loyalty
Time is a critical ingredient of strong, committed relationships
(Gundlach & Murphy, 1993); therefore, for relationships to grow,
loyalty programs need to promote interactions over time. Over time
and multiple interactions, consumer relationships evolve through
an exploratory, build-up, maturity, and decline stage of the
relationship lifecycle with each unique stage requiring customized
strategies (Jap & Ganesan, 2000). For instance, the appropriateness
or fit of a relationship investment or loyalty reward may vary across
different relationship stages. If a gift does not fit the norms
regarding “value” and “personal content” of a relationships stage, it
will fail to properly reinforce that relational stage and may derail the
natural life-cycle evolution. In early stages, rewards that are too
valuable or too personal in nature may make consumers question
the giver's motivation, the legitimacy of the transaction, and their
potential future obligations (Campbell, 1995; Marcoux, 2009). For
example, receiving a free family vacation after simply evaluating a
product would be questioned suspiciously, this might explain why
people react with caution toward time-share real estate sales tactics
(Budowski, 2010).
Alternatively, “cheap” or thoughtless gifts from a long-term
communal relationship partner may be perceived as uncaring,
signaling relationship dissolution, or a failure to reciprocate,
which may result in the partner being labeled as a welcher,
ingrate, or mooch (Palmatier et al., 2009). The penchant of the
grocery industry to give long-tenured consumers discounts may
be doing little to build relationships with these patrons, a notion
echoed in popular press (e.g., Butler, 2010).
Consumers first establishing their relationship with a seller may
be especially sensitive to the type of loyalty programs the seller uses
as a signal of their intentions. If a firm “rewards” new customers
with a financial-based incentive, suitable for transactional relation-
ships but taboo in communal relationships, it could actually
undermine any future relationship-building efforts (McGraw &
Tetlock, 2005). Relationship marketing research in the business-to-
business context (Palmatier et al., 2006b, p. 489) shows that
financially based loyalty programs have a negative return on
investments and suggests that “financial incentives may resemble a
pricing policy more than a relationship marketing program.” Firms
focusing mostly on giving consumers financial rewards may be
forgoing the opportunity to build long-lasting communal relation-
ship, and this focus may also help explain the poor returns on
loyalty program investments some firms report (Nunes & Dréze,
2006; Rosenbaum et al., 2005). This distinction is nowhere more
pronounced than in the consumer credit industry, in which
companies such as Citi Retail Partner Cards are shifting to unique,
personalized rewards to rise above the “sea of sameness” associated
with financial or commodity-based rewards that do nothing to
enhance consumer relationships (Fogarty, 2010).
P12. Loyalty programs will enhance relational-based loyalty
when the (a) objective value and (b) subjective content of the
rewards are congruent with the norms associated with a
consumer's relationship stage.
P13. Loyalty programs will undermine relational-based con-
sumer loyalty when financial incentives are offered during early
relationship stages.
Simultaneous effects of multiple loyalty-inducing mechanisms
Loyalty programs' overall effect on consumer behavior is
complex, partly because the effects of status, habits, and
relationships on consumers' behavior occur simultaneously and
over time. Consider Kim et al., (2009) results in which a
department store launched a new loyalty program that rewarded
top VIP customers with discounts, gifts, and invitations to
events. In that study, the retailer went from having no program
to having a two-tiered program that added customers to the VIP
program on the basis of past purchase history. The authors
compared consumer purchase behavior for 120 day before
entering the program with purchase behavior for 120 days after
entering the program and found no significant change in
purchase frequency and only a small impact on purchase
amounts. However, when Kim et al. (2009) classified VIP
members into three subgroups based on preprogram purchase
history (i.e., heavy, medium, and light), they found diverging
results, which were masked in the aggregate analysis.
Specifically, consumers who purchased the least before the
VIP program introduction significantly increased their frequen-
cy and purchase amount, but consumers who were the heaviest
buyers actually decreased their purchase frequency and
amounts. How can these counterintuitive results be explained?
Perhaps there was a simultaneous effect of habit, status and
relational loyalty-inducing mechanisms.
First, consider the impact of this VIP program on habitual
behavior. The heaviest buyers were most likely to shop
habitually; they made almost three times as many purchases
per month as light buyers. If the VIP program's introduction
significantly altered the environmental context which supported
their habit and/or shifted their attention to the goal of obtaining
rewards, research on habit change indicates that both the
environmental shock and the increase in focus on the linkage
between behavior and reward could undermine consumer habits
(Wood & Neal, 2009). Thus, launch of this program could have
been an impetus for some habitual frequent shoppers to
reevaluate competitive retailers.
Second, how did this VIP program influence the relative
status among customers? The VIP program might have been
poorly constructed in only having a single high-status level; that
is, it might have provided poor “idiosyncratic fit” for the heavy
buyers were treated the same as light buyers (Kivetz &
270
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 16 ---
Simonson, 2003). The negative impact of poor fit for heavy
buyers may have been exasperated by the program's clear status
element, because the “salience of the general concept of status
lead people to be more attentive to procedural fairness” (Van
Prooijen et al., 2002, p. 1353). Implicit in this argument is an
interaction effect between status and relationship mechanisms
in which programs that change relative status levels make the
influence of fairness perceptions on consumer relationships
stronger. Alternatively, status-based mechanisms may have had
a positive impact on the light and medium buyers added to the
program because they felt uplifted relative to the consumers not
added to the program, which could be a contributor to this
group's increase in purchase frequency and amounts.
Third, how would this VIP program be viewed from a
relationship perspective? Consumers who believed they had a
communal-type relationship might have felt “betrayed” when their
relationship was commercialized and made available to others
(Feinberg et al., 2002). Consumers prefer relationships that are
personalized and customized (Kumar & Shah, 2004), and
providing the same benefits to many customers may make some
heavy users believe that their relationship is no longer communal or
special, especially when they attend large “special events” provided
to all VIP members. Low-volume buyers receiving these rewards
may feel gratitude, resulting in reciprocal purchases, in which the
act of reciprocation generates feelings of pleasure (Palmatier et al.,
2009). This give-and-take process has been identified as a catalyst
to relationship formation in which this VIP program might have
strengthened the relationship with some of the low-volume
consumers, with long-term positive effects reaching beyond the
120-day evaluation window.
By using supplementary analyses with a behavioral proxy of
attitude, Kim et al. (2009) show that consumers who had the
strongest attitudinal connection with the store responded positively
to the VIP program, regardless of their preprogram purchase
amounts. These results suggest that consumers with a strong
relationship (attitudes) with the firm are impervious to negative
attributions regarding firm motives and perceive the program
rewards as just another step in the cycle of reciprocation, further
cementing the relationship.
Overall, this example shows some of the complexities inherent
in understanding the net effect of loyalty programs on firm
performance. However, additional empirical analysis is needed to
rule out other alternative explanations, which cannot be accom-
plished in post hoc analysis. This example highlights the need for
research that includes multiple loyalty-inducing mechanisms that
may amplify or attenuate each other, depending on the consumer
and the order in which each mechanism is introduced into the
consumer relationship. This VIP study also shows the difficulty in
teasing apart the effects of these different mechanisms using only
behavioral data. In the future, researchers should consider the
additive effects of multiple loyalty-inducing mechanisms and the
interactions between these mechanisms while recognizing that
these effects will vary over time and across different consumers.
P14. Loyalty programs' effect on consumer loyalty is mediated
by the combined effects (both additive and multiplicative) of (a)
habit-based, (b) status-based, and (c) relational-based loyalty
inducing mechanisms, such that an increase in one can
undermine or enhance another's existing effect.
P15. The effect of an increase of habit-based, status-based, and
relational-based loyalty-inducing mechanisms on consumer
loyalty will be differentially moderated by the stage of the
consumer relationship, such that:
(a) Effectively managing the habit-based mechanisms is
important in the mature stage to insulate against rela-
tionship decline,
(b) Effectively managing the status-based mechanisms are
important in the growth stage to motivate consumers to
achieve enhanced status and in the mature stage to
motivate consumers to protect their enhanced status, and
(c) Effectively managing the relational-based mechanisms
efforts are important in the initiation and growth stage to
initiate the path towards a communal social relationship in
later stages.
Conclusion
Viewing a road from only the windshield may provide a
consistent image and a clear path, but it likely leaves much of
the landscape unappreciated. Similarly, trying to understand the
overall impact of a loyalty program on performance through the
use of a single theoretical lens may provide experimental design
and explanatory parsimony but prevents the researcher from
capturing the multitude of ways a program could influence
consumers' behaviors and, ultimately, its effect on firm
performance. Consider Starbucks's recent decision to discon-
tinue a poorly performing premium rewards program that
required a registration fee and offered special discounts to
members (Allison, 2010). This loyalty program might have
conferred a sense of status to customers, reinforced habitual
purchasing, led to customers' relationships with the company,
and allowed customers to signal their special affiliation to
bystanders—all consonant with what researchers identify as
successful loyalty program characteristics. Assessed individu-
ally, each characteristic or mechanism appears supportive to a
successful program. Assessed jointly, however, these interact-
ing mechanisms were ultimately deemed dysfunctional.
Status for some consumers may create feelings of inequity
for others, degrading many relationships for the celebration of a
few. Thus, in this article, we propose that to understand how
loyalty programs actually work, a broader, more holistic
research perspective is needed to account for the simultaneous
effects of multiple theoretical mechanisms, cross-customer
effects, and temporal effects. The frequency of loyalty program
cancellations in the marketplace indicates that practitioners may
not fully understand how loyalty programs operate, which
reinforces the need for a new approach (Nunes & Dréze, 2006).
This article addresses this need by reviewing the extant
literature on loyalty programs and providing researchers a new
perspective for understanding the effectiveness of loyalty
programs. Charting a new course requires a roadmap. Our review
271
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 17 ---
of the literature reveals that the theoretical underpinnings of the
majority of loyalty program research rest on psychological
mechanisms from three specific domains: status, habit, and
relational. In summary, loyalty program–induced change to
consumer behaviors typically results from (1) conferring status to
consumers, which generates favorable comparisons with others;
(2) building habits, which causes advantageous memory
processes; and (3) developing relationships, which results in
more favorable treatment by consumers.
When researchers take a multitheoretical perspective, the
results are compelling. For example, Wagner et al. (2009) find
that withdrawing status impairs customer loyalty and that
company apologies attenuate the negative emotions associated
with status withdrawal. Folding prospect theory, theories of
status, theories of emotion, and relationship marketing into one
research design, Wagner et al. (2009) use many perspectives to
illustrate the nuances of loyalty program effects.
Overall, a broadened perspective creates many new research
questions; as suggestions, we offer 15 propositions to help
guide future loyalty program research. The complexities
involved in understanding the effectiveness of loyalty programs
suggest that many opportunities exist for researchers to help
solve the many mysteries surrounding loyalty programs.
Appendix A
Summary of construct definitions relevant to loyalty
program research.
Constructs
Conceptualizations
Representative Papers
Consumer loyalty programs
Loyalty
program
Any institutionalized
incentive system that
attempts to enhance
consumers' consumption
behavior over time beyond
the direct effects of
changes to the price or the
core offering.
De Wulf, et al., 2001;
Palmatier, Gopalakrishna,
& Houston, 2006
Consumer
loyalty
Repeat seller specific
consumption that may result
from desires to self-enhance
(status-based), learned memory
advantages (habit-based), or
forward-looking desires to
maintain a strong, committed
social relationship based on trust
and reciprocity with an
organization (relational-based).
Dick & Basu, 1994;
Oliver, 1999
Aggregate
consumer
loyalty
Total loyalty of all of a seller's
consumers, accounting
for temporal,
simultaneous, and
cross-customer effects
of loyalty-inducing
mechanisms.
Ferguson &
Hlavinka, 2007
Key constructs relevant to status-based loyalty
Status
Context-specific
and generally
desirable elevated
Anderson, et al., 2001;
Heffetz & Frank, 2011
Appendix A (continued)
Constructs
Conceptualizations
Representative Papers
ranking within a social
hierarchy based on
attributed characteristics.
Status
conferrals
“Actions [of another or others]
that provide status or
legitimacy to a target.”
Tiedens, 2001, p. 86
Status-
enhancement
Tendencies to use
“achievement, enjoyment,
or power” to “satisfy the
imperative for self-esteem.”
Anderson, et al., 2006,
p. 1095; Schwartz
& Bilsky, 1990, p. 887
Status beliefs
Learned social distinctions
that place someone in “one
category of social difference
[that is] more socially
respected” and
“socially valued.”
Mark, Smith-Lovin,
& Ridgeway, 2009;
Ridgeway, 2006, p. 848
Costly signals
Signals associated with
status that “demonstrate
both one's willingness
and one's ability to
incur” the costs associated
with such signals.
Griskevicius, et al., 2010,
p. 394; Han, Nunes,
& Drèze, 2010
Conspicuous
consumption
Public consumption of
status-related goods meant to
signal an individual's
elevated status.
Han, Nunes,
& Drèze, 2010
Social
comparisons
Upward, lateral, or
downward comparisons based
on status characteristics that
allow an individual to
aspire, fit in, or differentiate
from other status groups.
Drèze & Nunes, 2009;
Festinger, 1954; Johnson
& Stapel, 2007
Exclusivity
Selective access to benefits
that “influences the
response of deal recipients.”
Barone & Roy, 2010a,
p. 121; Drèze & Nunes,
2009
Power
“Psychological state”
associated with feelings of
efficacy and control.
Rucker & Galinsky,
2008,
p. 257
Key constructs relevant to habit-based loyalty
Habit
“Slowly developing
associations between
situational cues and repeatedly
performed behavior options.”
Tobias, 2009, p. 409
Habit strength
Robustness of a habit, not
“directly proportional to
frequency of past behavior,”
over alternative behaviors.
Ajzen, 2002, p. 110;
Wood & Neal, 2009
Context
stability
Degree of fluctuation
associated with cues tied
to the habitual behavior,
which include physical
location, preceding actions,
time, mood, and social
surrounding.
Ji & Wood, 2007;
Tobias, 2009;
Wood & Neal, 2009
Reminders
Situational, behavioral, or
event-based
(e.g., social interactions)
cues that “lead to the frequent
performance of [a]
new behavior.”
Neal et al., 2008; Tobias,
2009, p. 409
Instrumentality Experienced “contingency
between a behavior and its
rewarding outcomes.”
Wood & Neal, 2009,
p. 586
272
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 18 ---
Appendix A (continued)
Constructs
Conceptualizations
Representative Papers
Intentions
Deliberate action whose
likelihood increases the
“more favorable the attitude
and subjective norm and the
greater the perceived control.”
Ajzen, 2002, p. 107;
Ji & Wood, 2007;
Tobias, 2009
Decay
Decrease in intention
accessibility or habit
strength over time.
Tobias, 2009
Key constructs relevant to relationship-based loyalty
Relational
inputs
Personal costs incurred in
exchange, including time,
effort, flexibility, and sacrifice.
Adams, 1965; Palmatier
et al., 2006a
Relational
outcomes
Personal benefits extracted
from exchange, including
physical and psychological
resources.
Adams, 1965; Palmatier
et al., 2006a
Fairness
Acceptable comparison of
input-outcome ratios made
between or across exchange
partners.
Adams, 1965;
Samaha, Palmatier,
& Dant, 2011
Dependence
An actor's “need to maintain a
relationship with the partner to
achieve its goals.”
Emerson, 1962;
Kumar, Scheer,
& Steenkamp, 1995
p. 349
Cohesion
“Degree to which actors
perceive their relation to be a
distinct, unifying social
object.”
Lawler & Yoon, 1996,
p. 94
Commitment
Strong, ongoing cognitive and
affective desire to maintain an
exchange relationship.
Campbell, et al.,
2010; Verhoef, 2003
Trust
Confidence in the reliability
and honesty of an exchange
partner.
Campbell, et al., 2010;
Entitativity
“Perceptions of unity” associated
with groups, which influence the
“processes [that] are engaged as
one develops conceptions of
groups.” High unity reinforces
“on-line [vs.] memory-based
judgments,” sensitive to primacy
(vs. recency) recall biases.
Hamilton & Sherman, 1996,
pp. 341-344; Palmatier,
Scheer, & Steenkamp, 2007
Gratitude
“The emotional appreciation
for benefits received”; it is the
“emotional foundation for
reciprocal behaviors.”
Morales, 2005; Palmatier
et al., 2009, p. 1, 2
Note. This table lists key constructs considered in this article. Representative
papers relate to constructs defined.
References
Aaker, J., Fournier, S., & Brasel, S. A. (2004). When good brands do bad.
Journal of Consumer Research, 31(1), 1−16.
Adams, J. S. (1965). Inequity in social exchange. In B. Leonard (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology, Vol. 2. (pp. 267−299). New York:
Academic Press.
Aggarwal, P. (2004). The effects of brand relationship norms on consumer
attitudes and behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 31(1), 87−101.
Ajzen, I. (2002). Residual effects of past on later behavior: Habituation and reasoned
action perspectives. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(2), 107−122.
Allison, M. (2010). Starbucks discontinues Duetto visa card, another blow for some
loyalists. The Seattle Times, (February 11). http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/
html/coffeecity/2011050289_starbucks_discontinues_duetto.html.
Anderson, C., John, O., Keltner, D., & Kring, A. (2001). Who attains social
status? Effects of personality and physical attractiveness in social groups.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(1), 116−132.
Anderson, C., Srivastava, S., Beer, J., Spataro, S., & Chatman, J. (2006).
Knowing your place: Self-perceptions of status in face-to-face groups.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(6), 1094.
Arnold, M. J., & Reynolds, K. E. (2003). Hedonic shopping motivations.
Journal of Retailing, 79(2), 77−95.
Ashworth, L., Darke, P., & Schaller, M. (2005). No one wants to look cheap: Trade-
offs between social disincentives and the economic and psychological incentives
to redeem coupons. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(4), 295−306.
Bansal, H. S., Irving, G. P., & Taylor, S. F. (2004). A three-component model of
customer commitment to service providers. Journal of the Academy
Marketing Science, 32(3), 234−250.
Barkow, J. H. (1975). Prestige and culture: A biosocial interpretation. Current
Anthropology, 16(4), 553−562.
Barone, M. J., & Roy, T. (2010a). Does exclusivity always pay off? Exclusive
price promotions and consumer response. Journal of Marketing, 74(2),
121−132.
Barone, M. J., & Roy, T. (2010b). The effect of deal exclusivity on consumer
response to targeted price promotions: A social identification perspective.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 20(1), 78−89.
Bateson, M., Nettle, D., & Roberts, G. (2006). Cues of being watched enhance
cooperation in a real-world setting. Biology Letters, 2(3), 412−414.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psycholog-
ical Bulletin, 117(3), 497−529.
Bechwati, N. N., & Morrin, M. (2003). Outraged consumers: Getting even at the
expense of getting a good deal. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13(4),
440−453.
Bonnie, K. E., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2004). Primate social reciprocity and the
origin of gratitude. In R. A. Emmons, & M. E. McCullough (Eds.), The
psychology of gratitude (pp. 213−229). New York: Oxford University Press.
Bowlby, J. (1979). The making and breaking of affectional bonds. London:
Tavistock Publications.
Breivik, E., & Thorbjørnsen, H. (2008). Consumer brand relationships: An
investigation of two alternative models. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 36(4), 443−472.
Budowski, S. (2010). Red flags about timeshares. PR Newswire, (November 1). http:
//www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/red-flags-about-timeshares-106435048.
html.
Butler, S. L. (2010). Clipping coupons: Valuable savings or a waste of time? CBS
MoneyWatch.com, (June 16). http://moneywatch.bnet.com/saving-money/blog/
family-finance/clipping-coupons-valuable-savings-or-a-waste-of-time/2446/.
Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Boldry, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2005). Perceptions of
conflict and support in romantic relationships: The role of attachment
anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(3), 510−531.
Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Boldry, J. G., & Rubin, H. (2010). Trust,
variability in relationship evaluations, and relationship processes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99(1), 14−31.
Campbell, M. C. (1995). When attention-getting advertising tactics elicit consumer
inferences of manipulative intent: The importance of balancing benefits and
investments. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 4(3), 225−254.
Cannon, J. P., Achrol, R. S., & Gundlach, G. T. (2000). Contracts, norms, and plural
form governance. Journal of the Academy Marketing Science, 28(2), 180−194.
Darke, P. R., & Dahl, D. W. (2003). Fairness and discounts: The subjective
value of a bargain. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13(3), 328−338.
De Wulf, K., Odekerken-Schröder, G., & Iacobucci, D. (2001). Investments in
consumer relationships: A cross-country and cross-industry exploration.
Journal of Marketing, 65(4), 33−50.
Dick, A. S., & Basu, K. (1994). Customer loyalty: Toward an integrated
conceptual framework. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 22(2),
99−113.
Dowling, G. R., & Uncles, M. (1997). Do customer loyalty programs really
work? Sloan Management Review, 38(4), 71−82.
Drèze, X., & Nunes, J. C. (2009). Feeling superior: The impact of loyalty
program structure on consumers' perceptions of status. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35(6), 890−905.
273
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 19 ---
Du, R. Y., Kamakura, W. A., & Mela, C. F. (2007). Size and share of customer
wallet. Journal of Marketing, 71(2), 94−113.
Dwyer, R. F., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer–seller
relationships. Journal of Marketing, 51(2), 11−27.
Emerson, R. M. (1962). Power-dependence relations. American Sociological
Review, 27(1), 31−41.
Feinberg, F. M., Krishna, A., & Zhang, Z. J. (2002). Do we care what others get?
A behaviorist approach to targeted promotions. Journal of Marketing
Research, 39(3), 277−291.
Ferguson, R., & Hlavinka, K. (2007). The colloquy loyalty marketing census:
Sizing up the us loyalty marketing industry. Journal of Consumer
Marketing, 24, 313−321.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human
Relations, 7(2), 117−140.
Fishbach, A., Ratner, R. K., & Zhang, Y. (2011). Inherently loyal or easily
bored?: Nonconscious activation of consistency versus variety-seeking
behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(1), 38−48.
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a
unified theory of social relations. Psychological Review, 99(4), 689−723.
Fogarty, L. (2010). Citi retail partner cards to provide differentiating
loyalty solutions with r-dialogue. Business Wire, (November 15). http://
www.marketwatch.com/story/citi-retail-partner-cards-to-provide-differentiating-
loyalty-solutions-with-rdialogue-2010-11-15.
Gerbasi, A. (2010). Social exchange in networks and groups. In J. Levine, & M.
Hogg (Eds.), Encyclopedia of group processes and intergroup relations,
Vol. 2. (pp. 787−790). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Giesler, M. (2006). Consumer gift systems. Journal of Consumer Research, 33
(2), 283−290.
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Sheeran, P. (2009). Self-regulation of consumer decision
making and behavior: The role of implementation intentions. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 19(4), 593−607.
Goodwin, C. (1996). Communality as a dimension of service relationships.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 5(4), 387−415.
Grier, S. A., & Deshpandé, R. (2001). Social dimensions of consumer
distinctiveness: The influence of social status on group identity and
advertising persuasion. Journal of Marketing Research, 38(2), 216−224.
Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J., & Van den Bergh, B. (2010). Going green to be
seen: Status, reputation, and conspicuous conservation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 98(3), 392.
Gundlach, G. T., & Murphy, P. E. (1993). Ethical and legal foundations of
relational marketing exchanges. Journal of Marketing, 57(4), 35−46.
Hamilton, D. L., & Sherman, S. J. (1996). Perceiving persons and groups.
Psychological Review, 103(2), 336−355.
Han, Y. J., Nunes, J. C., & Drèze, X. (2010). Signaling status with luxury goods:
The role of brand prominence.Journal of Marketing, 74, 15−30 (July).
Harbaugh, W. T. (1998). What do donations buy?: A model of philanthropy based
on prestige and warm glow. Journal of Public Economics, 67(2), 269−284.
Heffetz, O., & Frank, R. H. (2011). Preferences for status: Evidence and economic
implications. In J. Benhabib, A. Bisin, & M. O. Jackson (Eds.), Handbook of
social economics, Vol. 1A (pp. 69–91). San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
Heilman, C. M., Nakamoto, K., & Rao, A. G. (2002). Pleasant surprises:
Consumer response to unexpected in-store coupons. Journal of Marketing
Research, 39(2), 242−252.
Henderson, C. M., & Palmatier, R. W. (2010). Understanding the relational
ecosystem in a connected world. In S. Wuyts, M. G. Dekimpe, E. Gijsbrechts, &
R. Pieters (Eds.), The connected customer: The changing nature of consumer and
business markets (pp. 37−76). New York: Routledge.
Homans, G. C. (1958). Social behavior as exchange. The American Journal of
Sociology, 63(6), 597−606.
Houston, D. A., Sherman, S. J., & Baker, S. M. (1991). Feature matching,
unique features, and the dynamics of the choice process: Predecision conflict
and postdecision satisfaction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
27(5), 411−430.
Howard, D. J. (1992). Gift-wrapping effects on product attitudes: A mood-
biasing explanation. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 1(3), 197−223.
Hymowitz, C. (2004). CEOs use technology to gather information, build
customer loyalty. The Wall Street Journal, (October 26). http://online.wsj.
com/article/NA_WSJ_PUB:SB109874197651555143.html.
Jap, S. D., & Ganesan, S. (2000). Control mechanisms and the relationship life
cycle: Implications for safeguarding specific investments and developing
commitment. Journal of Marketing Research, 37, 227−245.
Ji, M. F., & Wood, W. (2007). Purchase and consumption habits: Not necessarily
what you intend. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 17(4), 261−276.
Johnson, C. S., & Stapel, D. A. (2007). No pain, no gain: The conditions under
which upward comparisons lead to better performance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1051−1067.
Johnson, E. J., Bellman, S., & Lohse, G. L. (2003). Cognitive lock-in and the
power law of practice. Journal of Marketing, 67(2), 62−75.
Johnson, M. D., Herrmann, A., & Huber, F. (2006). The evolution of loyalty
intentions. Journal of Marketing, 70(2), 122−132.
Josephs, R., Sellers, J., Newman, M., & Mehta, P. (2006). The mismatch effect:
When testosterone and status are at odds. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 90(6), 999−1013.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1990). Experimental tests of the
endowment effect and the coase theorem. The Journal of Political Economy,
98(6), 1325−1348.
Kim, D., Lee, S. -y., Bu, K., & Lee, S. (2009). Do vip programs always work well?
The mderating role of loyalty. Psychology and Marketing, 26(7), 590−609.
King, P. (2010). Personal shoppers find clothes to make the man.
The Wall Street Journal, (August 12). http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB10001424052748704164904575421373622725304.html.
Kivetz, R., & Simonson, I. (2003). The idiosyncratic fit heuristic: Effort
advantage as a determinant of consumer response to loyalty programs.
Journal of Marketing Research, 40(4), 454−467.
Kivetz, R., Urminsky, O., & Zheng, Y. (2006). The goal-gradient hypothesis
resurrected: Purchase acceleration, illusionary goal progress, and customer
retention. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(1), 39−58.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L. K., & Steenkamp, J. -B. E. M. (1995). The effects of
perceived interdependence on dealer attitudes. Journal of Marketing
Research, 32(3), 348−356.
Kumar, V., & Shah, D. (2004). Building and sustaining profitable customer
loyalty for the 21st century. Journal of Retailing, 80(4), 317−330.
Labroo, A. A., Dhar, R., & Schwarz, N. (2008). Of frog wines and frowning
watches: Semantic priming, perceptual fluency, and brand evaluation.
Journal of Consumer Research, 34(6), 819−831.
Labroo, A. A., & Nielsen, J. H. (2010). Half the thrill is in the chase: Twisted
inferences from embodied cognitions and brand evaluation. Journal of
Consumer Research, 37(1), 143−158.
Lacey, R., Suh, J., & Morgan, R. M. (2007). Differential effects of preferential
treatment levels on relational outcomes. Journal of Service Research, 9(3),
241−256.
Lawler, E. J., & Yoon, J. (1996). Commitment in exchange relations: Test of a theory
of relational cohesion. American Sociological Review, 61(1), 89−108.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York:
Springer Publishing Co..
Leenheer, J., van Heerde, H. J., Bijmolt, T. H. A., & Smidts, A. (2007). Do
loyalty programs really enhance behavioral loyalty? An empirical analysis
accounting for self-selecting members. International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 24(1), 31−47.
Lewis, M. (2004). The influence of loyalty programs and short-term promotions
on customer retention. Journal of Marketing Research, 41(3), 281−292.
Liu, M. W., & Soman, D. (2008). Behavioral pricing. In C. P. Haugtvedt, P. M.
Herr, & F. R. Kardes (Eds.), Handbook of consumer psychology
(pp. 659−681). New York: Psychology Press.
Liu, Y. (2007). The long-term impact of loyalty programs on consumer purchase
behavior and loyalty. Journal of Marketing, 71(4), 19−35.
Luo, X. (2005). How does shopping with others influence impulsive
purchasing? Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(4), 288−294.
Mackie, D. M., Devos, T., & Smith, E. R. (2000). Intergroup emotions:
Explaining offensive action tendencies in an intergroup context. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79(4), 602−616.
Mägi, A. W. (2003). Share of wallet in retailing: The effects of customer
satisfaction, loyalty cards and shopper characteristics. Journal of Retailing,
79(2), 97−106.
Marcoux, J. -S. (2009). Escaping the gift economy. Journal of Consumer
Research, 36(4), 671−685.
274
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 20 ---
Mark, N. P., Smith-Lovin, L., & Ridgeway, C. L. (2009). Why do nominal
characteristics acquire status value? A minimal explanation for status
construction. American Journal of Sociology, 115(3), 832−862.
McGraw, A. P., & Tetlock, P. E. (2005). Taboo trade-offs, relational framing,
and the acceptability of exchanges. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(1),
2−15.
Miniard, P. W., Bhatla, S., & Sirdeshmukh, D. (1992). Mood as a determinant of
postconsumption product evaluations: Mood effects and their dependency
on the affective intensity of the consumption experience. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 1(2), 173−195.
Morales, A. C. (2005). Giving firms an “E” For effort: Consumer responses to
high-effort firms. Journal of Consumer Research, 31(4), 806−812.
Mosquera, P. M. R., Parrott, W. G., & de Mendoza, A. H. (2010). I fear your envy, I
rejoice in your coveting: On the ambivalent experience of being envied by others.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(5), 842−854.
Muniz, A. M., Jr., & O'Guinn, T. C. (2001). Brand community. Journal of
Consumer Research, 27(4), 412−432.
Murray, Kyle B., & Häubl, G. (2007). Explaining cognitive lock-in: The role of
skill-based habits of use in consumer choice. Journal of Consumer
Research, 34(1), 77−88.
Neal, D., Wood, W., & Pascoe, A. M. (2008). Triggers of real-world habits:
Implications for consumer behavior. Duluth, MN: Paper presented at the
Advances in Consumer Research Conference.
Novak, T. P., & Hoffman, D. L. (2009). The fit of thinking style and situation:
New measures of situation-specific experiential and rational cognition.
Journal of Consumer Research, 36(1), 56−72.
Nunes, J. C., & Dréze, X. (2006). Your loyalty program is betraying you.
Harvard Business Review, 84(4), 124−131.
O'Brien, L., & Jones, C. (1995). Do rewards really create loyalty? Harvard
Business Review, 73(3), 75−82.
Oliver, R. L. (1999). Whence consumer loyalty? Journal of Marketing, 63
(Special Issue), 33−44.
Oliver, R. L. (1980). A cognitive model of the antecedents and consequences of
satisfaction decisions. Journal of Marketing Research, 17(4), 460−469.
Palmatier, R. W., Dant, R. P., Grewal, D., & Evans, K. R. (2006). Factors
influencing the effectiveness of relationship marketing: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Marketing, 70(3), 136−153.
Palmatier, R. W., Gopalakrishna, S., & Houston, M. B. (2006). Returns on
business-to-business relationship marketing investments: Strategies for
leveraging profits. Marketing Science, 25(5), 477−493.
Palmatier, R. W., Jarvis, C. B., Bechkoff, J. R., & Kardes, F. R. (2009). The role of
customer gratitude in relationship marketing. Journal of Marketing, 73(5), 1−18.
Palmatier, R. W., Scheer, L. K., & Steenkamp, J. B. (2007). Customer loyalty to
whom? Managing the benefits and risks of salesperson-owned loyalty.
Journal of Marketing Research, 44(2), 185−199.
Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. (1978). The external control of organizations: A
resource dependence approach. New York: Harper and Row Publishers.
Quinn, J. M., Pascoe, A., Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2010). Can't control
yourself? Monitor those bad habits. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 36(4), 499−511.
Raghubir, P. (2004). Free gift with purchase: Promoting or discounting the
brand? Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14(1–2), 181−186.
Ranaweera, C., & Prabhu, J. (2003). On the relative importance of customer
satisfaction and trust as determinants of customer retention and positive
word of mouth. Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for
Marketing, 12(1), 80−90.
Redish, A. D., Jensen, S., Johnson, A., & Kurth-Nelson, Z. (2007). Reconciling
reinforcement learning models with behavioral extinction and renewal:
Implications for addiction, relapse, and problem gambling. Psychological
Review, 114(3), 784−805.
Ridgeway, C. L. (2006). Status construction theory. In P. J. Burke (Ed.),
Contemporary social psychological theories (pp. 301−323). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169−192.
Roccas, S. (2003). Identification and status revisited: The moderating role of
self-enhancement and self-transcendence values. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 29(6), 726.
Romero-Canyas, R., Downey, G., Reddy, K. S., Rodriguez, S., Cavanaugh, T.
J., & Pelayo, R. (2010). Paying to belong: When does rejection trigger
ingratiation? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(5), 802−823.
Rosenbaum, M. S., Ostrom, A. L., & Kuntze, R. (2005). Loyalty programs and a
sense of community. Journal of Services Marketing, 19(4), 222−233.
Rosman, K. (2010). A world in which you can be mayor: People vie for
title, glory, and discounts on foursquare.Com; marketers play ball.
The Wall Street Journal, (November 2). http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB10001424052748704462704575590260880867750.html.
Rucker, Derek D., & Galinsky, Adam D. (2008). Desire to acquire:
Powerlessness and compensatory consumption. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35(2), 257−267.
Samaha, S., Palmatier, R. W., & Dant, R. P. (2011). Poisoning Relationships:
PerceiveUnfairness in Channels of Distribution. Journal of Marketing, 75(3),
99−117.
Schroeder, D. A. (2010). Norms. In J. M. Levine, & M. A. Hogg (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of group processes and intergroup relations, Vol. 2. (pp.
608−612). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1990). Toward a theory of the universal content
and structure of values: Extensions and cross-cultural replications. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(5), 878−891.
Shugan, S. M. (2005). Brand loyalty programs: Are they shams? Marketing
Science, 24(2), 185−193.
Skinner, B. F. (1974). About behaviorism. New York: Knopf.
Smith, E. R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual-process models in social and cognitive
psychology: Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4(2), 108−131.
Sundie, J. M., Ward, J. C., Beal, D. J., Chin, W. W., & Geiger-Oneto, S. (2009).
Schadenfreude as a consumption-related emotion: Feeling happiness about
the downfall of another's product. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19(3),
356−373.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In
W. G. Austin, & S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup
relations (pp. 138−182). Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Thaler, R. (1985). Mental accounting and consumer choice. Marketing Science,
4(3), 199−214.
Thomson, M., MacInnis, D. J., & Park, C. W. (2005). The ties that bind:
Measuring the strength of consumers' emotional attachments to brands.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(1), 77−91.
Tiedens, L. Z. (2001). Anger and advancement versus sadness and subjugation:
The effect of negative emotion expressions on social status conferral.
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 80(1), 86−94.
Tobias, R. (2009). Changing behavior by memory aids: A social psychological
model of prospective memory and habit development tested with dynamic
field data. Psychological Review, 116(2), 408−438.
Valenzuela, A., Mellers, B., & Strebel, J. (2010). Pleasurable surprises: A cross-
cultural study of consumer responses to unexpected incentives. Journal of
Consumer Research, 36(5), 792−805.
Van de Ven, N., Zeelenberg, M., & Pieters, R. (2009). Leveling up and down:
The experiences of benign and malicious envy. Emotion, 9(3), 419−429.
Van Prooijen, J., Van den Bos, K., & Wilke, H. (2002). Procedural justice and
status: Status salience as antecedent of procedural fairness effects. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83(6), 1353−1361.
Verhoef, P. C. (2003). Understanding the effect of customer relationship
management efforts on customer retention and customer share development.
Journal of Marketing, 67(4), 30−45.
Verplanken, B. (2006). Beyond frequency: Habit as mental construct. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 45(3), 639−656.
Verplanken, B. (2008). Habit and consumer behavior: Implications for
interventions and behavior change. Duluth, MN: Paper presented at the
Advances in Consumer Research Conference.
Verplanken, B., & Wood, W. (2006). Interventions to break and create
consumer habits. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 25(1), 90−103.
Wagner, T., Hennig-Thurau, T., & Rudolph, T. (2009). Does customer demotion
jeopardize loyalty? Journal of Marketing, 73(3), 69−85.
Walker, R. (2009). Hyatt's random acts of generosity. The New York
Times, (June 17). http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/21/magazine/21
FOB-Consumed-t.html.
275
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276


--- Page 21 ---
White, T. B. (2004). Consumer disclosure and disclosure avoidance: A
motivational framework. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14(1–2),
41−51.
Wood, S. (2010). The comfort food fallacy: Avoiding old favorites in times of
change. Journal of Consumer Research, 36(6), 950−963.
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2007). A new look at habits and the habit-goal
interface. Psychological Review, 114(4), 843−863.
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2009). The habitual consumer. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 19(4), 579−592.
Wright, J. (1997). Helping-at-the-nest in arabian babblers: Signalling social
status or sensible investment in chicks? Animal Behaviour, 54(6),
1439−1448.
Yin, H. H., & Knowlton, B. J. (2006). The role of the basal ganglia in habit
formation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(6), 464−476.
Zauberman, G. (2003). The intertemporal dynamics of consumer lock-in.
Journal of Consumer Research, 30(3), 405−419.
Zhang, Y., & Fishbach, A. (2005). The role of anticipated emotions in the
endowment effect. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(4), 316−324.
276
C.M. Henderson et al. / Journal of Consumer Psychology 21 (2011) 256–276
