124
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
www.palgrave-journals.com/dddmp/
 What happened to strategic 
segmentation ? 
 Angus  Jenkinson 
 Date Received: 13th July, 2009 
 Abstract 
 Segmentation that combines insight with descriptive, predictive 
and operational capability represents the most complete and 
powerful capability for marketers, when achievable, and therefore 
a gold standard. However, the author notes a trend towards 
simpler, limited modes. These tend to isolate capabilities, such as 
descriptive market segmentation, or predictive analytics for 
targeting tactical campaigns, or real-time  ‘ black-box ’ behavioural 
algorithms, such as collaborative ﬁ ltering and next best action. 
The author suggests this is brought about by failures in technique, 
process or imagination, giving typical causes, and posits a simple 
 ‘ test of effectiveness ’ self-audit for organisation decision-making. 
 Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice (2009)  11, 124 – 139.  
doi: 10.1057/dddmp.2009.27 
 
 Introduction 
 This discussion paper suggests that parallel to the rise of advanced 
statistical predictive techniques (as used for example on online social 
networking sites), consultancies and clients have grown wary of 
attempting to implement full-scale segmentation, and have settled for 
lesser (although useful) models. The sections that follow therefore 
discuss: 
 1.  the nature of the problem; 
 2.  a model that elaborates six limited forms of segmentation 
( ‘ segmentation lite ’ ); 
 3.  the nature and potential of a full-scale strategic segmentation 
approach ( ‘ gold standard ’ ); 
 4.  reasons for failure; 
 5.  a  ‘ test of current effectiveness ’ audit checklist to guide executive 
action. 
 The problem 
 Over 20 years ago, database marketers started formulating new 
segmentation objectives to reﬂ ect a meaningful and actionable blend of 
behavioural data and imputed, fused or collated attitudinal 
information. 1 – 3 The goal was to organise knowledge and marketing 
strategy, as well as communication and service behaviours, by applying 
 Keywords:  segmentation , 
 collaborative ﬁ ltering ,  analytics , 
 strategy ,  audit ,  data mining 
 Keywords:  segmentation , 
 collaborative ﬁ ltering ,  analytics , 
 strategy ,  audit ,  data mining 
 Angus Jenkinson 
 Stepping Stones Consultancy Ltd. 
Grange Farm Barn, Upper Dean 
Huntingdon PE28 OLT, UK 
 Angus Jenkinson 
 is Chief Consulting Ofﬁ cer 
and Founder of consulting 
agency Stepping Stones, and 
Chair / Director of the Centre 
for Integrated Marketing at 
the University of Bedfordshire 
Business School. 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
125
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
a combination of descriptive, predictive and operational targeting and 
execution capabilities. Marketers aimed to understand the brand ’ s 
customers in terms of segments that were: 
 1.  collectively related to the brand according to universal properties 
of the brand (in the absence of which it would make sense to create 
a new brand); 
 2.  he terogeneous with respect to other segments with the differences 
rooted in brand choice, not merely in broadly held values, 
geodemographic or lifestyle characteristics; 4 
 3.  relatively stable over time; 
 4.  relatively homogeneous within themselves, so that they might also 
be targeted as a meaningful community (or tribe) with predictable 
results; 
 5.  although liable to member individuation, typically because of 
instability over and in time, for example with respect to timing of 
an offer or selection (eg changing lifestage status or from prospect 
to customer  — since the goal is to ﬁ nd prospects like your best 
customers), enabling targeting and execution of appropriate actions 
at the right time; 
 6.  insightful, descriptive and predictive, so that marketers and the 
organisation can understand the different segments (or communities) 
and develop appropriate strategies, innovations and communications 
messages; 
 7.  employing systems and organisational capability that enable 
strategic, tactical and operational interventions at market, segment 
and individual customer level; 
 8.  as well as having tracking and evaluation research capability. 
 The model relationships can be expressed graphically in several forms, 
including the two versions in  Figure 1 . 
 This three-dimensional model differs from both the competing 
models: one-solution-for-all, which communicates to everyone in the 
same way, and mass customisation, which assumes a mass of 
 Segment gold standard 
 Segment gold standard 
Brand universals
Community
Characteristics
Individuals
Community
Characteristics
Individuals
Brand universals
 Figure 1 :  Two modes of expressing the brand / segment / individual relationship 


 Jenkinson 
126
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
individuals receiving individualised communication from the brand, 
sometimes described as  ‘ segment-of-one ’ . Its purpose was to ensure 
understanding, insight and focus across the organisation and drive 
business and marketing strategy through differentiated value 
propositions and individualised tactical / operational execution. This 
became a de facto gold standard among experienced database 
marketers, and was implemented using a variety of techniques 
including clustering, factor analysis, regression and data mining, 
collating and fusing data from across the organisation, third parties, 
and research. This was successfully implemented on many occasions. 
For example, working with Ogilvy from 1992 to 2001 involved dozens 
of projects and a documented global methodology for Ogilvy 
practitioners in over 50 countries. It also remains a stated goal among 
many leading marketing thinkers. 5 
 In 2007,  I suddenly realised that the gold standard was progressively 
being abandoned as a result of a combination of project failures and 
spectacular advances in statistical, data mining and rule-based customer 
management techniques, particularly in the online and call centre 
spaces. Woodcock, Stone and Foss, the CMAT development team, 
were in fact already reporting the trend by 2002 in their CMAT global 
survey: for example, they showed that only 19 per cent of companies 
had carried out basic decile analysis, 54 per cent did not recognise 
customer behaviours in planning, and there was a broadly negative 
trend in analytical and planning capability since their previous study 
3 years earlier (the only exception being customer retention). 6 The 
occasion for my discovery was a meeting of the senior consultants 
and associates of a consulting division of one of the big consumer 
proﬁ ling houses in the UK. There was a 2-day meeting to discuss 
case studies, leading-edge practices, tools and methods. Everyone was 
experienced, smart and involved in signiﬁ cant projects in major 
client organisations. There was considerable discussion on customer 
journeys, uplift models, call centre performance improvement, 
next best action (or best next-action), collaborative ﬁ ltering, campaign 
management tool kits, and analytical and process software and its 
application. 
 However, not one project involved gold standard segmentation. 
Yet, if rule-based action works so well in the absence of a strategic 
understanding of customer types, think how much better it would work 
in the presence of one. 
 A conversation with the chief consulting ofﬁ cer yielded this 
admission:  ‘ Isn ’ t that all debunked now? We can ’ t get it to work and 
we haven ’ t found any clients who want it. Do you have any evidence 
of success? ’ 
 Recent  personal experiences support this analysis, while market 
research consultancy ﬁ rm Incite also report in their Spring 2009 
newsletter 7 that segmentations form a key part of company or brand 
strategy in fewer than 40 per cent of companies, a fall of 16 per cent 
since their similar survey in 2004. They also report a 31 per cent 
increase in the perception that segmentation studies are complex and 
 Abandoning the gold 
standard 
 Abandoning the gold 
standard 
 Corporate failure 
 Corporate failure 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
127
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
require experience to do well. It is true that ultimately segmentation 
requires expertise to do well. However, the rapid  increase in perception 
of difﬁ culty suggests a rising concern among marketers, consistent with 
the fall in strategic commitment. 
 What is segmentation? 
 Segmentation means different things to different people. They use 
a variety of different approaches, dimensions and evidence types, 
as indicated in  Figure 2 . 
 Woodcock  et al. orient their discussion around a blend of three 
approaches: customer proﬁ tability, customer buying values 
(needs and desires that form the basis for purchase decisions) and 
behavioural variation, perhaps including lifestyle and attitudes. 6 
Marketing textbooks 8,9 typically describe  ‘ market segmentation ’ 
and  ‘ customer segmentation ’ .  Market segmentation provides a 
straightforward descriptive account of the customer base and typically 
supports business and channel strategy and customer portfolio 
management. Examples include business and consumer segments, 
and ﬁ rst-class and economy customers.  Customer segmentation is 
typically a predictive and targeting technique for campaign 
planning using data mining and modelling techniques. Both of 
these approaches are reﬂ ected in the model described below (see also 
 Figure 3 ). 
Attitudinal
Lifestyle
Need set
Geodemographics
Psychographics
Share
of affection
(Bonding -SOA)
Ethnographics
Share of wallet
(SOW)
Recency 
Frequency
Response
Financial
Customer &
Category £Value
Media
Behavioural
Touchpoints
Targeting
 Figure 2 :  Segmentation approaches and dimensions 


 Jenkinson 
128
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
 A behavioural / market model of segmentation 
 These two approaches provide a two-dimensional classiﬁ cation model 
that reveals interactions among six widespread and useful approaches, 
each of which nevertheless falls short of the power of  ‘ gold standard ’ 
segmentation. The model is structured on two axes: behavioural 
analytics, which are typically designed for predictive capability, and 
market description (see Figure 3). 
 1.  Campaign analytics :  typically means selecting the best people for a 
particular direct marketing or sales initiative based on past 
behaviours. Analysts use data mining techniques 10 that build on 
traditional recency-frequency-monetary techniques. Although useful, 
listing groups by value provides limited communication insight. 
Targeting customers who have bought mortgages but not bank 
accounts makes sense, but it works better when informed by deeper 
insight. The nature of campaign analytics means that an analytical 
or direct marketing team can report ﬁ nancial gains and even win 
marketing awards without the organisation achieving signiﬁ cant 
customer insight. 
 2.  Community collaborative ﬁ ltering and behavioural afﬁ nities : an 
advanced approach in the online space practised by brands such as 
Amazon. By ﬁ nding statistical similarities in customer behaviour, 
automatic algorithms make recommendations (eg  ‘ people like you 
do things like this ’ ) or brand behaviour (eg  ‘ we would like to 
promote you ’ ). Some practitioners argue that this is superior to 
traditional segmentation because it responds to differences in 
customer behaviour at different times. However, this is somewhat 
analogous to front-line service staff developing expertise about 
customers that does not ﬁ lter up to top management. 
 3.  Next best action ( NBA ): like afﬁ nity modelling, it aims to choose 
the next appropriate action for each customer based on past 
behaviour in the current situation. For example, customers who 
 Predictive analytics 
 Predictive analytics 
Insights
Descriptive
Obvious
Simple
Analytics
Advanced
Statistics
Predictive
 Figure 3 :  Descriptive and predictive dimensions 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
129
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
responded to one of the last three catalogues might be sent a new 
one, or customers whose savings policy approaches redemption 
might be recipients of a promotion generated by ﬁ nancial 
governance and marketing initiative ( ‘ your money is now available 
to you / would you like to reinvest it? ’ ). Heuristics and / or rules may 
derive from executive ideas, statistical modelling or collaborative 
ﬁ ltering. Again, this is a useful technique that works even better in 
the context of a segmentation framework. 
 
 These  methods may be combined. Amazon use analytics and 
promotional planning to send e-mails with the content modiﬁ ed by 
product promotions and collaborative ﬁ ltering. Executed well, they 
make a signiﬁ cant difference and organisations rightly commit 
signiﬁ cant resources to this. Some marketers, particularly online, 
promote automated algorithms as the primary strategy. However, 
all such techniques can work even better when guided by a master 
layer of segmentation.  
 The  next three classes 11 are also important tools for business 
success. Each is widely practised, indeed probably more than the 
previous three, not least because they seem easier. All may use 
research; indeed satisfaction and service research is extensive, and 
brand research may help. 
 4.  Customer-led  market differentiation : consumers and businesses, 
prospects, loyal customers and defectors, trade / channel customers 
and end-users, enterprises and small businesses, children and 
pensioners, men and women, and companies in different industries 
are candidates for different treatment. Unfortunately, they are 
usually obvious and do not provide competitive advantage. To 
achieve traction against the competition requires deeper insight. 
Often this means segmentation of these generic markets. In other 
cases, a more powerful variation can be found that cuts across 
markets, which can be particularly useful for international 
marketing. 12 In a research project for a software company targeting 
industry-speciﬁ c software plug-ins, it was found that industry 
variation was much less important than end-user attitude and 
behaviour. Differences between bankers, lawyers and other 
professionals were less important than differentiation cutting across 
all professional groups. 
 5.  Product-led customer differentiation : this often dovetails with 
customer-led segments (for example, men ’ s razors typically produce 
male customers and males want men ’ s razors). There may be 
signiﬁ cant non-ﬁ nancial differences between customers buying 
low-end three-series BMWs and those buying top-end seven-series 
models, but given the similarity in build quality and design ethos 
across the range, it is not surprising to ﬁ nd that there are also 
segment proﬁ les that cut across the range. Another problem 
with product line segmentation is that when organisations 
are structured to enhance product expertise (retail banking, 
 Combining predictive 
analytics 
 Combining predictive 
analytics 
 Attitude and usage 
(U  & A) 
 Attitude and usage 
(U  & A) 
 Descriptive analytics 
 Descriptive analytics 


 Jenkinson 
130
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
insurance, credit card, mortgage), this often reduces overall 
customer insight.
  
 The problem with most market segmentation is that it is 
conventional, probably used by competitors, and therefore lacking 
competitive insight and differentiation. The ﬁ nal approach, needs-
based segmentation, can provide this edge, but often fails to be 
operationalised. 
 6.  Needs ( or  attitudes ) -based communication insights : the same Incite 
study found that eight out of 10 respondents claimed to segment 
customers using consumer-based research (a ﬁ gure that has 
remained stable for 5 years). However, this is typically used for 
advertising planning. Agency planners and brand managers use 
insights to position the brand and advertise more effectively in 
different media or channels. Consider boiled sweets: they mask 
hunger, replace smoking, cleanse or refresh mouths, distract or are 
playful, relieve stress, and provide comfort, fun, friendship or 
innocent romance. Although most confectionery consumers do not 
justify or want customer relationship marketing (CRM) investment, 
this approach can be and is used successfully in direct programmes: 
van Hattum and Hoijtink recently reported how a European 
mail-order garden products company used data fusion to create four 
different creative treatments for the cover and introduction to their 
catalogue (the rest of the catalogue remaining the same) to make 
them more appealing. 13 Yet, most advertisers and advertising agencies 
like a single positioning and brand proposition with a single creative 
treatment, because it is simple and achieves economies of scale. 14 
 Examples of segmentation and  ‘ gold standard ’ 
segmentation opportunity 
 All these techniques have their place in contributing to the full 
potential of segmentation, as illustrated by the following three 
examples. 
 Learner drivers 
 Learner drivers choosing a driving school and progressing through 
their training programme are of different types and behaviours. Some 
tend to be more nervous, others more cocky. Some are still at school 
and being assisted by parents, who are ﬁ nancially and emotionally 
involved. Others are at work, or are perhaps university students; they 
are older and paying for themselves. They are male and female, rural 
or urban, practice with their parents or without, persistent and 
dedicated or dilettante, worried or relaxed about the cost (a full course 
can cost over  £ 1,000), interested or concerned or  ‘ not bothered ’ about 
their social relationship with the instructor, and their value can vary 
from the price of a single lesson, to the cost of an initial discounted 
package of four lessons, to 15 or more times that amount. Indeed, they 
 Boiled sweets example 
 Boiled sweets example 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
131
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
are a very good example of the non-Gaussian (ie not a standard 
bell-curve population) customer base. Their needs, attitudes and 
behaviours are different. As a company, you can leave all this to 
the instructors to sort out, in which case all of your expertise is 
embedded in your instructor base (who are probably planning to leave 
and set up their own independent service to these very customers), or 
you  can try to navigate a more intelligent strategic approach that 
integrates behaviours across the organisation. It is in fact relatively 
easy to identify a typology and also to embed it into a database based 
on a few key indicators. Appropriate actions can be implemented 
online, where the learner has their own space, in local centres, 
through the choice of instructors and their actions, by applying 
automated service and recognition programmes using text, e-mail 
and physical mail channels and where appropriate communications 
to parents. 
 The National Trust 
 The National Trust, with millions of members, is one of the largest 
membership organisations in the UK. Some people are members just 
because they value the idea of heritage but others because they see it 
as an opportunity to support quality family time together and to 
contribute to the development of their children. For some, it is 
important that it is a pleasurable social and entertainment experience, 
and the quality of tea, scones and clotted cream is vital to that 
experience. Others are amateur historians or primarily love the wild 
spaces. The National Trust provides relaxation, relief or renewal 
after the stresses of a week ’ s work, or a place to engage and to turn 
on the brain for the ﬁ rst time in the week. Some members never visit 
properties and thousands are active volunteers of their time. Their 
needs, attitudes and behaviours are different, and this provides a 
relatively straightforward basis for segmentation, which can be 
implemented through direct communications, events, speciﬁ c 
promotions and activities at National Trust properties. Segmentation 
needs to take account of needs orientation, behavioural history and 
level of ﬁ nancial contribution. 
 Harley-Davidson 
 Another elegant and comprehensive description of this practice was 
published more than 10 years ago and describes Harley-Davidson ’ s 
segmentation approach, 15 which I recently validated. 16 Swinyard 
describes a strategic ethnographic research project for Harley-Davidson 
that identiﬁ ed characteristic societal and philosophical beliefs, lifestyle 
and behaviours (including media consumption), attitudes to bikes and 
biking, and product consumption patterns. Examples of questions are 
shown in  Table 1 . 
 Swinyard demonstrates how Harley-Davidson ’ s product and 
marketing strategy maps onto the insights provided by these precisely 
differentiated, and extremely interesting, real customer groups. 
 Knowledge equity and 
a strategic approach 
 Knowledge equity and 
a strategic approach 


 Jenkinson 
132
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
Consider the difference between say  Dream Riders , the largest and 
most valuable group, who are  ‘ unremarkable motorcyclists that seem to 
like the idea of motorcycling better than motorcycling itself ’ and are 
the most likely to have bought a new bike, and those belonging to 
 Harley Owners Group ( HOG) Heaven , who feel a sense of  ‘ at-one-
ness ’ from just owning a Harley-Davidson, with the act of ownership 
representing self-actualisation. Harley-Davidson use their HOG 
relationship marketing programme in their database to recognise 
individual customers and apply the insights to the design of product 
development, communications and event programmes. 
 General principles and implementation 
 The  goal of segmentation is to identify ethnographically differentiated 
groups of people (the segment typology) who each have a practical 
level of shared meaning, attitudes, emotional resonance, behaviours, 
and actual or potential (for prospects) relationship with the brand or 
organisation. Following my own 1994 example, 17 I shall describe the 
segments in the typology as customer communities, 18 since each is 
relatively homogenous in their relationship with the brand / organisation. 
A community is generally considered to be a group of people who 
share something signiﬁ cant in common. Whereas it is hard to develop 
organisational strategy for a customer segment-of-one, it is realistic to 
plan and operationalise differentiated value propositions for 
communities. Understanding these communities typically requires the 
intersection of needs / attitudinal differences and behavioural / ﬁ nancial 
differences. The typology is then translated into business strategies and 
marketing behaviours. Operationalisation can include the use of 
automated rule-based and statistical algorithms at execution time. 
 Figure 4  shows a conceptual and systems-oriented architecture for 
developing and using such segmentation with layers for strategy 
management, typology management, action planning and operational /
 execution capability management. The development of strategy and 
customer segmentation typology must be an iterative process. These 
two then provide parameters that control or inﬂ uence the more personal 
 Customer communities 
 Customer communities 
 Segmentation 
architecture 
 Segmentation 
architecture 
 Table 1 :  Biking and lifestyle questions 
 Riding, to me, is often a magical experience. 
 My motorcycle often seems like it’s alive. 
 I like tattoos. 
 I like to ride long distances  … to me 500 miles is a short trip. 
 I like to ride fast. 
 My bike is made more for comfort and speed. 
 I feel like I am in a rut much of the time. 
 I agree that,  ‘ Eat, drink and be merry for tomorrow we die ’ . 
 I like to keep things perfectly neat and orderly. 
 I would like to be important in politics. 
 My life is as full and interesting as anyone’s. 
 I don ’ t mind doing housework. 
 I like to watch sports events on television. 
 Source : Swinyard (1996). 13 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
133
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
and / or automated statistical and rule-based algorithms that support 
marketing and service activity at the  ‘ right action ’ layer. It is easy to 
operationalise particular campaigns or service transactions based on the 
ﬁ nancial worth of customers while using higher-order insights for 
strategic organisation. For example, you could organise three different 
call centre operations teams that use a variety of techniques to 
prioritise how fast or extensively individual callers to each of these 
teams are serviced. The operational layer provides data and systems 
infrastructure. 
 Tesco and Amazon 
 Community  segmentation is possible with strategic commitment, as 
demonstrated by Tesco. Senior executives have said 19 that board 
members can describe in detail  ‘ during an elevator ride ’ each of their 
main customer segments and how store design, merchandise 
assortment, shelf stocking, marketing communications and so on 
reﬂ ect their interlacing ﬁ nancial value, lives, needs and shopping 
habits. This strategic knowledge derives from commitment to practical 
action and innovation. The very richness and abundance of potential 
data represents an inhibitor for most retailers. Tesco turned it to their 
advantage. Using a research technique known as Charles Osgood ’ s 
Semantic Differential Procedures, they can impute information about 
customers from the products that they buy:  ‘ This was the new insight 
that drove the next stage in Clubcard segmentation: that each product 
we buy says something about us and, by scoring in this way, you can 
build a picture of what attitudes and beliefs drive our behaviour; at 
least, what drives it while we are in the supermarket ’ . 20 
 Tesco approached the challenge of applying 45,000 Osgood proﬁ les 
(each item in the product range) with 20 different Likert scales for 
each, generating a total of 1.2 million potential rating decisions, using 
a  ‘ rolling ball ’ technique based on afﬁ nity modelling, analysing in this 
case not customers but products, and looking at what customers were 
buying together and applying these proﬁ les to the products, in a project 
that took a team 3 months of hard work. Once all the products are 
proﬁ led, the result is Tesco ’ s possibly unique grocery segmentation 
capability. As customers buy products, their proﬁ les are automatically 
developed by the proﬁ les of the products they buy. If they succeed in 
 Tesco ’ s innovative 
approach 
 Tesco ’ s innovative 
approach 
Strategy Layer 
Typology Layer 
Right Action Layer 
Operational Layer 
 Figure 4 :  Conceptual and systems architecture 


 Jenkinson 
134
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
the tough US market it may be down to the segmentation capability 
they have developed. 
 Amazon ’ s  analytics are pioneering and brilliantly successful. Their 
policy of stocking every book, and similarly wide ranges in other 
categories, makes it much easier for them to operate on autopilot. Even 
if Amazon runs on black box algorithms, it would still make many 
reasonable recommendations to customers; it would just have little idea 
what kinds of customers it had. However,  if Amazon did implement the 
layered segmentation architecture with its community insights sitting 
over afﬁ nity-based and NBA algorithms (doing so would be a closely 
guarded secret), it would gain extraordinarily detailed knowledge of its 
customers. Which would you rather run: a customer black box or a 
customer base you understand? 
 Differences in approach 
 Community-based segmentation is therefore amenable to all of the 
analytical and behavioural algorithms, but adds two beneﬁ ts: 
 1.  More  knowledge about customers : The business does not rely on 
either the abstraction of a data point or the simplicity of an obvious 
segment. Instead, more sophisticated stakeholder research (most 
customers and frontline staff) is used to understand and categorise 
the needs, attitudes, requirements and emotional value that underpin 
different customer communities, that is, getting to know customers 
as people with a relationship to us. 
 2.  A more customer-focused organisation : broad practical insights 
inform value solutions and treatments for communities, which are 
executed for individual customers with the help of real-time 
modelling techniques. As a result, the business can be managed as 
an integrated set of capabilities sharing a common platform but 
geared towards differentiated customer value. 
 My  experience suggests that this leads to a number of advantages, 
apart from improved ﬁ nancial results: 
 1.  There is a better feel for the business, which means that you can 
manage it more intelligently. This leads to better performance 
management and more productivity in marketing, and less conﬂ ict, 
argument and time wasting. 
 2.  There is potential for more relevant value propositions and 
creative. This makes for more interesting work and better learning 
and makes the company more customer-focused. 
 3.  An enriched understanding of the brand itself: the brand ’ s universal 
principles mean different things to different customers and so 
segmentation develops a richer more layered understanding of the 
meaning and essential value of the brand. 
 4.  Marketing costs reduce as a result of better targeting and more 
relevance; this applies to both paid-for media advertising and direct 
communications. 
 Amazon 
 Amazon 
 Beneﬁ ts 
 Beneﬁ ts 
 Advantages 
 Advantages 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
135
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
 5.  Employee satisfaction increases as they deal better with real people 
with more granular solutions. 
 6.  Customer experience is enhanced and therefore brand and 
customer equity is increased: solutions become more relevant 
and appropriate. 
 So why doesn ’ t everyone do this? 20 barriers 
 Companies across ﬁ nancial services, FMCG and packaged goods, 
consumer services, business services, the auto industry, technology and 
telephony complain that although they may be successful with the 
lesser techniques they have not been able to implement an enriched 
segmentation model successfully. A key problem is that they cannot 
map attitude-based segmentation based on research back onto a 
database. My experience is that this is usually because the methodology 
and approach are wrong or misguided. Reasons for this derive from 
lack of experience, lack of expertise and inappropriate ideas: 
 1.  Being  too busy; 
 2.  Trying it, spending a lot of money, getting it wrong, vowing never 
to do it again; 
 3.  Managing the brand using a single message; 
 4.  Managing advertising and CRM independently in different spaces, 
that is, without having an integrated planning process; this 
typically leads to a breakdown in consumer insight and certainly 
action; 
 5.  Organising the business around products; 
 6.  Making segmentation too complicated, or too simplistic; 
 7.  Being satisﬁ ed with impressive but partial gains from data mining, 
next best action, market segmentation, etc; 
 8.  Decision chain gaps between strategy / board level (who may have 
much more exciting things like mergers, acquisitions and share 
prices to think about) and operational senior managers (who learn 
the political art of avoiding obvious failure); a not untypical 
customer-focused project might begin with the following brief: 
 ‘ we can only spend  $ X, it has to be delivered by month Y, we are 
not allowed to do Z, and the mission is to achieve a 10 per cent 
productivity improvement in customer targeting ’ ; a more useful 
brief takes the following form:  ‘ Provide an actionable resource that 
provides competitive advantage at low risk with a return on 
investment of more than X per cent to meet our strategic goals 
of A, B, C ’ ; 
 9.  Divisional segmentation: for example, when the printer division 
and the computer division each have their own marketing 
database; 
 10.  Not designing the project as an integrated multi-disciplinary 
process. Success requires integration of knowledge and insights 
from a variety of sources and use of different methodologies, 
including internal interviews, qualitative and quantitative research 
 Barriers and better 
alternatives 
 Barriers and better 
alternatives 


 Jenkinson 
136
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
and data analytics. However, proper planning reduces the 
complexity of this  — for Green Homes Concierge (an LDA / Mayor 
of London project to help Londoners make their homes green), 
meeting with services, marketing and operations management, 
focus group work and interviews with frontline staff, in-depth 
interviews of sufﬁ cient customers, acquisition of publicly available 
studies of green consumers, fusion with Mosaic and the database, 
management and team brieﬁ ng cost less than 20 per cent of 
commonly quoted segmentation studies; 
 11.  Attachment to market, demographic or ﬁ nancial factors, such as 
age, lifestyle or value (escaping boredom with the playful, tasty 
pleasure of sweets is not age-related). It will also sometimes be 
more useful to orient on a needs / attitudes insight and stratify 
ﬁ nancial value when implementing campaigns and service; 
 12.  Alternatively, aiming for  ‘ pure statistical, data-led segmentation ’ 
without any assumptions or hypotheses to guide data collection 
and analytics typically ensures a hodgepodge of models; prior 
knowledge needs to be shaped, for example by workshops and 
qualitative research; 
 13.  Excessive reliance on complex (and potentially arcane) statistical 
method; 
 14.  Assuming Gaussian (bell-shaped curve) populations when this is 
not the case (thus eliminating assumed  ‘ outliers ’ that are actually 
signiﬁ cant population members); 
 15.  Gaps in skills and experience: signiﬁ cant projects usually 
require the participation of analysts, researchers, marketers 
and agency planners, as well as front-line people, together 
providing expertise in statistics and modelling, qualitative and 
quantitative research, customers, and marketing and service 
applications; 
 16.  Having executive project leadership that does not understand 
the realities of modelling and is not interested in getting 
involved; 
 17.  Insufﬁ cient involvement of top management from across the 
business functions; 
 18.  Not ﬁ nding simple and effective ways of tagging customers to 
segments; this typically leads to insights without the capability 
to act on them; Moskowitz  et al. indicate one of many approaches 
to overcome this problem, 12 while Tesco and Harley-Davidson 
indicate other approaches. 
 19.  Not ﬁ nding ways to alert individual staff of the type of person 
they are dealing with; an example might be an icon or a colour 
code; 
 20.  Not communicating the model to staff and senior management 
so that they  ‘ get it ’ and commit; this often stems from using 
PowerPoint to present knowledge-rich descriptive proﬁ les rather 
than converting the community segments into real living people, 
for example by using day-in-the-life archetype descriptions (such 
as CustomerPrints, which were developed for OgilvyOne in the 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
137
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
late 1990s, 21 Personas, developed for online user proﬁ ling, and 
Nuanced Portraits 22 ) and perhaps videos or theatre. 
 Assessing your experience and practice: 
A segmentation audit 
 This paper invites discussion about the art of the possible and 
the effect on business success of segmentation methods. The 
following self-audit checklist of capability is intended to summarise 
segmentation objectives and guide consideration of next steps. The 
points can be scored (eg on a scale of 0 – 7) or used to promote 
discussion. 
 1.  Does  your segmentation model provide competitive advantage 
through insight (ie capability not shared by other key players in 
your category)?  
 Points to consider : 
 1.1  Does  it provide management with revealing insights about the 
value of customers? 
 1.2  Does it provide management with revealing insights about 
attitudes and non-ﬁ nancial behaviours of your customers? 
 1.3  Is it understood and used by board members for strategic 
decision-making? 
 1.4  Has your understanding of customer segments enriched your 
understanding of the brand? 
 1.5  Does it show why your best customers belong to you and not 
other brands? 
 1.6  Are the insights real in action? 
 2.  Does your segmentation model provide competitive advantage 
through operational and structural capability (ie capability not 
shared by other key players in your category)?  
 Points you may wish to consider : 
 2.1  Is  the business or organisation organised according to these 
segments? 
 2.2  Does every person in your company who has anything to do 
with customers or customer value development understand 
enough to adjust their actions where appropriate? 
 2.3  Are business systems and processes operationally geared to it? 
 2.4  Are business systems and processes operationally effective at 
applying it at all appropriate points? 
 2.5  Can you apply rules and / or statistical algorithms that work for 
the customer and business wherever useful? 
 2.6  Is it used strategically to reﬁ ne segment-level differentiated 
value propositions? 
 2.7  Is it used tactically to reﬁ ne timing and content of 
customer-speciﬁ c value offers? 
 Audit questions 
 Audit questions 
 Insights 
 Insights 
 Operations 
 Operations 


 Jenkinson 
138
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
 2.8  Has it reduced marketing costs (paid-for media advertising and 
direct communications) as a result of better targeting and more 
relevance? 
 2.9  Has it reduced service costs (on a like-for-like service basis)? 
 3.  Does your segmentation enhance all stakeholder experience? 
 Points you may wish to consider : 
 3.1  Has  customer experience measurably improved as solutions 
become more relevant, appropriate and better delivered? 
 3.2  Has it increased employee satisfaction as they deal better with 
people? 
 3.3  Has it improved brand / corporate reputation through being seen 
to deal with people better? 
 3.4  Has customer segmentation increased the equity value of the 
organisation? 
 3.5  Is management easier and more personally rewarding? 
 3.6  Have stress levels reduced? 
 4.  Overall,  does your segmentation provide a cushion and response 
mechanism against the activities of your competitors? 
 References and Notes 
 1 .  For example, Ron Courtheoux, a former VP of Epsilon, did a UK tour in 1986 and The 
Computing Group shortly began offering such techniques in the UK. The IDM offered a 
database marketing course between 1991 and 2001 (led by the author and Chris Last) 
promoting these techniques. See also books such as Shepard  et al. (1990) 2 and Hughes 
(1991/1996) 3 . 
 2 .  Shepard ,  D . ,  Batra ,  R . ,  Deutch ,  A . ,  Orme ,  G . and  Ratner ,  B . ( 1990 )  The New Direct 
Marketing: How to Implement a Proﬁ t Driven Database Marketing Strategy ,  Business One 
Irwin, Homewood, Illinois . 
 3 .  Hughes ,  A .  M . ( 1991/1996 )  The Complete Database Marketer ,  Irwin Professional Publishing, 
London . 
 4 .  Anderson ,  P . ( 2008 )  ‘ Segmentation what makes consumers tick?  Admap, Volume 43, Number 
6, Issue 495, pp. 24 – 27: World Advertising Research Centre, Henley-on-Thames, UK . 
 5 .  See for example:  White ,  R . ( 2008 )  ‘ Segmentation: Crutch or booster?  Admap, Volume 43, 
Number 6, Issue 495, pp. 22 – 23: World Advertising Research Centre, Henley-on-Thames, UK . 
 6 .  Woodcock ,  N . ,  Stone ,  M . and  Foss ,  B . ( 2003 )  The Customer Management Scorecard: 
Managing CRM for Proﬁ t ,  Kogan Page, London/Sterling VA . 
 7 .  Incite .  [no author stated] ( 2009 )  ‘ Anything but business as usual.  Available at  http://www.
incite.ws/incites-articles.cfm ,  accessed on 30 June 2009 . 
 8 .  Buttle ,  F . ( 2009 )  Customer Relationship Management: Concepts and Technologies ,  2nd 
edition,  Butterworth-Heinemann, Burlington, MA . 
 9 .  Payne ,  A . ( 2008 )  Handbook of CRM: Achieving Excellence in Customer Management , 
 Butterworth-Heinemann, Burlington, MA . 
 10 .  Hansotia ,  B . ( 2009 )  ‘ Marketing by objectives: Using segmentation based on purchase timing 
to enhance customer equity ’ ,  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice ,  
Vol.  10 ,  No.  04 ,  pp.  336 – 355 .  
 11 .  Product- and customer-level are simply different perspectives on the same principle . 
 12 .  Moskowitz ,  H .  R . ,  Beckley ,  J .  H . ,  Luckow ,  T . and  Paulus ,  K .  O . ( 2008 )  ‘ Cross-national 
segments for a food product: Deﬁ ning them and a strategy for ﬁ nding them in the absence of 
 Customer experience 
 Customer experience 
 Competitive advantage 
 Competitive advantage 


 What happened to strategic segmentation? 
139
© 2009 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 1746-0166 VOL.11 NO.2 PP 124–139.  Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice
 ‘ mineable ’ databases ’ ,  Journal of Database Marketing and Customer Strategy Management , 
 Vol.  15 ,  No.  3 ,  pp.  191 – 206 .  
 13 .  Van Hattum ,  P . and  Hoijtink ,  H . ( 2009 )  ‘ Improving your sales with data fusion ’ ,  Journal of 
Database Marketing and Customer Strategy Management ,  Vol.  16 ,  No.  1 ,  pp.  7 – 14 .  
 14 .  Outside scope is the way ﬁ rms apply a market segmentation strategy by creating a portfolio 
of brands, each positioned on a different insight . 
 15 .  Swinyard ,  W .  R . ( 1996 )  ‘ The hard core and Zen riders of Harley Davidson: A market-driven 
segmentation analysis ’ ,  Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing ,  Vol. 
 4 ,  No.  4 ,  pp.  337 – 362 .  
 16 .  While differences have occurred in the segmentation over the last 10 years, the basic 
principles remain sound, source unpublished research by the Centre for Integrated Marketing . 
 17 .  Jenkinson ,  A . ( 1994 )  ‘ Beyond segmentation ’ ,  Journal of Targeting, Measurement and 
Analysis for Marketing ,  Vol.  3 ,  No.  1 ,  pp.  60 – 72 . 
 18 .  An alternative name favoured by some marketers is  ‘ tribe ’ . 
 19 .  Mason ,  T . ( 1998 )  ‘ The best shopping trip? How Tesco keeps the customer satisﬁ ed ’ ,  Journal 
of the Market Research Society ,  Vol.  40 ,  No.  1 ,  pp.  5 – 12 .  January 1998, paper based on a 
talk given to the Marketing Society in 1996 . 
 20 .  Humby ,  C . ,  Hunt ,  T . and  Phillips ,  T . ( 2007 )  Scoring Points: How Tesco Continues to Win 
Customer Loyalty ,  Kogan Page, London . 
 21 .  Detailed methodology loaded at secure site  trufﬂ es.ogilvy.com . 
 22 .  Ring ,  A . and  Benvenuto ,  A . ( 2008 )  ‘ The power of nuance  Admap, Volume 43, Number 6, 
Issue 495, pp. 28 – 30: World Advertising Research Centre, Henley-on-Thames, UK . 
   
