--- Page 1 ---
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES
 Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005: 11-25
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability, and
 the Treatment of Acquisition Spending
 Phillip E. Pfeifer
 Alumni Research Professor of Business Administration
 Darden Graduate School of Business
 Mark E. Haskins
 Professor of Business Administration
 Darden Graduate School of Business
 Robert M. Conroy
 Paul M. Hammaker Research Professor of Business Administration
 Director, International, Tayloe Murphy Center
 Darden Graduate School of Business
 Schultz addressed the importance
 of good definitions in an editorial
 calling on marketing academics and
 practitioners to define direct market-
 ing.
 If we don't [establish precise definitions] , I
 fear we will find that what you are talking
 about when you say direct marketingmay have
 absolutely no relationship to what / con-
 sider direct marketing. And, for an academic
 discipline, that is the worst of all possible
 worlds (1995: 9).
 Whereas the confusion in 1995 was
 over the meaning of direct marketing,
 we believe there is an unhealthy
 amount of confusion today over the
 meanings of two of the most impor-
 tant terms in interactive marketing:
 customer lifetime value and customer prof-
 itability.
 The terms customer lifetime value and
 customer profitability are important to
 interactive marketing because they
 are both used to talk about and mea-
 sure customer differences. As Pep-
 pers and Rogers stated, "some cus-
 tomers are more equal than others,"
 and firms can prosper by learning
 how to "identify and capitalize on
 customer differences" (1997: 30).
 Given the importance to interactive
 marketing of recognizing customer
 differences, it is critical to use precise
 language to talk about those differ-
 ences and thereby avoid Schultz's
 "worst of all possible worlds."
 Instead of using precise language
 when discussing customer differ-
 ences, however, it appears some re-
 searchers are doing just the opposite.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
 (11)
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 2 ---
 12 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 In a recent article surveying customer
 profitability measurement and re-
 search, Mulhern (1999) lists seven
 terms the literature uses to refer to
 customer profitability. Customer lifetime
 value is included in the list. Mulhern
 goes on to use the two terms inter-
 changeably. His "general formula-
 tion for customer lifetime value" is an
 equation with a left-hand-side varia-
 ble defined as "the profit of customer
 i to the firm" (1999: 30). So clearly,
 Mulhern sees no difference in the
 meanings of customer lifetime value and
 customer profitability.
 The purpose of this article is to im-
 prove the precision of our language
 in this area by focusing on the differ-
 ence between customer lifetime value
 and customer profitability. If you agree
 with Mulhern (1999) that there is no
 difference in the meaning of these
 two terms, then our purpose is to cre-
 ate 2L difference. If you are uncertain
 of the difference between the mean-
 ings of these two terms, then our pur-
 pose is to attempt to clarify the differ-
 ence for you. Finally, if you have a
 clear understanding of the differ-
 ences in meanings, our purpose is to
 verify that we share the same under-
 standing.
 As an example of how imprecise
 language has led to confusion in this
 area, consider how Heskett, Sasser,
 and Schlesinger describe the results
 of an important study conducted by
 Reichheld and Sasser (1990):
 ... a 5 percentage point increase in av-
 erage customer retention of credit card cus-
 tomers . . . would increase a credit card
 service company's profits by 75 percent
 (1997:61).
 This statement suggests that the 75%
 increase reported by Reichheld and
 Sasser applies to company profits.
 However, a careful reading of Rei-
 chheld and Sasser (1990) shows that
 the reported increase refers instead
 to "customer value," described by
 Reichheld and Sasser as "the net
 present value of the profit streams fo
 the average customer life" (1990:
 110). Contributing to the confusion
 is the title of the main chart in the
 Reichheld and Sasser article: "reduc-
 ing defections 5% boosts profits 25%
 to 85%" (1990:10). "Customer
 value," "net present value of profit
 streams," and "profit" were all used
 to label the same metric, leading oth-
 ers to misinterpret the metric as re-
 ferring to company profits.
 As another example of confusion,
 we point to the discussion in Jain and
 Singh (2002) of whether acquisition
 costs should be included in measures
 of customer lifetime value. Jain and
 Singh argue that acquisition costs
 should be included in customer lifetime
 value and suggest that Berger and
 Nasr (1998) are incorrect to leave
 them out "in order to get their inter-
 pretation" of customer lifetime value as
 "the maximum profitable acquisition
 cost" (2002: 16). "In short," say Jain
 and Singh, "CLV is a concept that is
 forward looking, and the right defi-
 nition . . . should consider the es-
 sence of the concept as against rigid
 definitions" (2002: 16). Jain and
 Singh appear to be saying that any
 rigid definition of customer lifetime
 value that allows acquisition costs to
 be excluded goes against their under-
 standing of the essence of the con-
 cept of customer lifetime value. Since
 Berger and Nasr are content to leave
 out acquisition costs when modeling
 customer lifetime value, Jain and
 Singh (2002) say they do not share
 Berger and Naser's (1998) under-
 standing of the meaning of customer
 lifetime value.
 These examples illustrate the con-
 fusion that exists surrounding the
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 3 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 13
 terms customer lifetime value and cus-
 tomer profitability. On one hand, many
 people use these terms interchange-
 ably and loosely. "Customer value"
 becomes "profit," which becomes
 "company's profit." On the other
 hand, authors of a recent survey arti-
 cle on customer lifetime value take ex-
 ception to how others have inter-
 preted the term. And if you will allow
 us one more hand, we find Rud
 (2002) suggesting that "the defini-
 tion of lifetime value is industry spe-
 cific" (2002:64).
 We will attempt to eliminate this
 confusion by offering "good" defi-
 nitions of the two terms. By "good"
 we mean concise, acceptable, inclu-
 sive, and consistent. The definitions
 will be short and to the point and will
 match, as best as possible, the current
 understanding of interactive market-
 ing practitioners and academics.
 Thus, for example, the definitions
 will capitalize on an area of agree-
 ment articulated by Knie-Andersen
 (2001) who suggested that everyone
 agrees that customer lifetime value is
 a discounted measure of future dollar
 amounts but with differences in how
 to define those future amounts.
 By "inclusive," we mean the defi-
 nitions will attempt to capture the
 general essence of the concepts with
 the expectation that users can add
 more specificity when appropriate. As
 an example, our definition will refer
 to "the customer relationship" with
 the idea that it will apply to an indi-
 vidual customer. If users want to talk
 about groups of customers, they can
 talk about the "average customer life-
 time value for the group."
 Finally, we want the definitions to
 be "consistent" with generally-ac-
 cepted definitions of the component
 words: value and profitability. We seek
 this consistency both with dictionary
 definitions and, more importantly,
 with academic definitions from the
 host disciplines from which they
 come - finance and accounting.
 DEFINITIONS AND
 DIFFERENTIATION
 Fortunately, two academic disci
 plines contribute to our understand
 ing of customer lifetime value (CLV
 and customer profitability (CP). As arti
 ulated by Knie-Andersen (2001),
 most (but not all) authors agree that
 CLV takes into account the time value
 of money using discounting and tra-
 ditional present value techniques. We
 argue that the use of the word value
 in CLV should match the use of the
 word value in finance, as in the valu-
 ation of an asset by determining its
 net present value.
 The conceptual "common charac-
 teristic of all assets" is "future eco-
 nomic benefit . . . [which] eventu-
 ally results in net cash inflows to the
 enterprise" (FASB, 1985: para. 28).
 From finance, the proper valuation of
 an asset that provides future eco-
 nomic benefits is the asset's present
 value of all future period's net cash
 inflows. Under the assumption that a
 customer relationship meets the con-
 ceptual notion of an asset, it should
 be valued at its present value where
 cash flows over the projected life of
 the relationship are discounted at the
 appropriate discount rate. Note that
 value is the discounted value of each
 cash flow and not profit. So if the
 value in CLV is to match the value in
 present value, and if the definition of
 CLV is to be consistent with the fun-
 damental principles of finance, then
 CLV should be the present value of
 the cash inflows and outflows (not
 profits) accruing to the firm over the
 lifetime of the customer relationship.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 4 ---
 14 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 The word profitability in CP should
 match the meaning of the word prof-
 itability in the discipline of account-
 ing. Thus, we turn to the discipline of
 accounting for assistance in under-
 standing the concept of profit as it ap-
 plies to an individual customer rela-
 tionship. The accounting construct of
 profit is: (1) the arithmetic difference
 between earned revenues and associ-
 ated costs - where revenues and costs
 are measured on an accrual basis, not
 a cash basis; and (2) the profit mea-
 sure applies to a discrete time period
 such as a quarter or a year. Customer
 profitability will be defined in such a
 way that it will be the concept of ac-
 counting profit applied to an individ-
 ual customer relationship.
 Consequently, the distinction be-
 tween CLV and CP will be a distinc-
 tion between value and profit in the
 financial sense. Roughly speaking,
 value is what something is worth (the
 cash-equivalent price today that a
 buyer would be willing to pay to own
 the future cash-flow benefits
 springing from that asset) and profit
 is the difference between accrual-
 based revenues and accrual-based
 costs incurred in generating those
 revenues for a given period, such as a
 quarter or a year. It is sometimes the
 case that unprofitable firms carry
 high valuations (under the expecta-
 tion the company will generate a fu-
 ture stream of positive cash flows). (It
 can also be the case that a profitable
 firm has negative cash flow, but that
 is another story.) And, for similar rea-
 sons, it may also be the case that a
 customer who is currently unprofita-
 ble can have a positive CLV.
 Let us also point out that the
 meaning of the word value as the fi-
 nancial worth of an asset is consis-
 tent with the use of the terms total
 customer value and perceived value by
 Kotier (2002) and others to refer to
 a customer's maximum willingness
 to pay for a given product or service.
 A customer's perceived value for a
 product is how much (in monetary
 units) the product is worth to the
 customer. This is the same notion of
 value inherent in CLV - how much
 the customer relationship is worth
 in the judgment of the firm (see Ber-
 ger et al, 2002). Thus, we disagree
 with the opinion expressed by Mul-
 hern (1999) that the use of the word
 value in CLV is inconsistent with the
 use of the word value in perceived
 value.
 DEFINING CUSTOMER
 PROFITABILITY
 Our definition of customer profitabil
 ity is as follows:
 Customer Profitability (CP) is the differ
 ence between the revenues earned from
 and the costs associated with the customer
 relationship during a specified period.
 This definition grounds CP in the
 generally-accepted accounting profit
 notion applied to the individual cus-
 tomer relationship. As articulated by
 Foster, Gupta and Sjoblom, the basic
 reason to care about customer prof-
 itability is a recognition that "each
 dollar of revenue does not contribute
 equally to net income" (1996: 5).
 Some dollars (and thus, some cus-
 tomers) contribute more than others
 to the net income of the firm. It is
 important to distinguish high-profit
 relationships from low- or negative-
 profit relationships in order for the
 firm to react appropriately and im-
 prove overall firm profitability. This is
 entirely consistent with the Peppers
 and Rogers' (1997) idea that some
 customers are more equal than oth-
 ers.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 5 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 15
 Table 1. Revenues and Profits for the Firm's Eight Large Custo
 Customer Revenues CP Cumulative CP
 Β $64,531 $37,616 $37,616
 D $39,521 $23,407 $61,023
 A $71,632 $21,662 $82,685
 C $44,153 $15,707 $98,392
 F $25,627 $13,654 $112,046
 H $14,104 $5,699 $117,745
 Ε $30,915 -$4,209 $113,536
 G $18,279 -$10,874 $102,662
 It is by design that our definition is
 not specific with respect to what cat-
 egories of costs should be included in
 CP. Neither does the definition offer
 guidance as to how to assign costs in
 a specific category to customer rela-
 tionships. No matter what categories
 of costs are chosen for inclusion and
 no matter how the included costs are
 assigned to relationships, the result-
 ing difference between revenues and
 costs for a customer relationship will
 qualify as CP. Thus, there will be
 many different ' 'implementations"
 of CP depending on what the user de-
 cides to include and how the user as-
 signs the included costs to customer
 relationships.
 At one extreme will be CP imple-
 mentations that include all revenues
 and costs accounted for in the firm's
 publicly-reported operating profit for
 a specified period. To illustrate, we
 use a numerical example from Foster,
 Gupta, and Sjoblom (1996) of a firm
 with eight large customers. Table 1
 shows the revenue and CPs from
 each, sorted by CP. The CP numbers
 in this example were constructed in
 such a way that the sum of the CPs
 over all customers equaled the firm's
 reported operating profit. Thus,
 $102,662 is the firm's operating profit
 from the large customers. When
 added to the operating profit from
 medium and small customers, the to-
 tal will equal the operating profit re-
 ported by the firm to its shareholders
 for the period in question.
 The results of such an analysis are
 often summarized in something
 called a "whale curve" (see, for ex-
 ample, Kaplan and Narayanan,
 2001). The whale curve is a graph of
 cumulative CP (either in dollars or as
 percentage of total customer profit)
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 6 ---
 16 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 Figure I. The Whale Curve: Cumulative Profit versus Num
 $1 20, 000 r
 $100,000 S I ^ i S' /
 fron nnn «i Í"
 Φου,υυυ fron nnn «i ξ
 $60,000 N S Η~Ί3 S S ΒΊ
 N s s s s ^ ^ ^
 $40,000 SSSSSS§rnCP
 $20,000- SrirS fc S S S S H Cumulatif CP
 e..llilI,J,iJULI- SrirS fc S S S S H
 ■$20,000 1-8
 Customer
 versus the cumulative number (or
 percentage) of customers, where it is
 understood that the customers are
 sorted in decreasing order of CP. Fig-
 ure I charts the whale curve for the
 data in Table 1 .
 For the more comprehensive CP
 implementations that include all rev-
 enues and costs accounted for in the
 firm's publicly-reported operating
 profit, customer profits will be as
 comparable across firms as is operat-
 ing profit. For less comprehensive CP
 implementations where no attempt is
 made to match the sum of individual
 customer CPs to a particular line item
 in a company's published income
 statement, across-firm CP compari-
 sons will be problematic, and CP will
 be used mostly to compare customers
 within a firm.
 The example in Figure I illustrates
 the idea that each dollar of earned
 revenue does not contribute equally
 to the firm's reported operating
 profit. Although customer A is the
 largest in terms of revenue, customer
 Β is the largest in terms of CP. Un-
 derstanding these differences in cus-
 tomer profitability can help the firm
 figure out what to do to improve its
 profitability. Foster et al. (1996) list
 nine options the example firm has to
 improve profitability.
 At the other extreme of CP imple-
 mentations is one in which cost of
 goods sold is the only category of
 costs included. Because the differ-
 ence between revenue and cost of
 goods sold is also known as gross mar-
 gin, the results of such an implemen-
 tation of CP could also be referred to
 as customer gross margin. Thus, we view
 customer gross margin as a special
 case of the more general concept of
 CP.
 Foster, Gupta, and Sjoblom (1996)
 provide a hypothetical example of a
 customer-cost hierarchy:
 Revenues
 Customer-specific costs
 Customer-specific contribution
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 7 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 17
 Customer-line costs
 Customer-line contribution
 Company enterprise cost
 Operating Profit
 Using this hierarchy, users must de-
 cide how many levels of costs to in-
 clude in CP for the particular pur-
 poses at hand.
 For cost management purposes, customer-
 line costs and company enterprise costs
 need not be assigned to individual custom-
 ers. Consequently, the company's total op-
 erating income will be less than the sum of
 total customer specific contributions (Fos-
 ter et al, 1996: 14).
 In summary, all the costs accounted
 for in the firm's operating profit (in-
 come) may or may not be included in
 a particular implementation of CP.
 But no matter what categories of costs
 are included, the results will satisfy
 our definition of CP as long as the
 focus is on earned revenues and as-
 sociated costs, regardless of whether
 or not they involve cash flows in the
 focal period.
 As mentioned above, our defini-
 tion is also silent with respect to how
 to assign the included costs to cus-
 tomer relationships. This will be chal-
 lenging when, in fact,
 many costs of interest are common costs -
 i.e., not specific to individual customers. For
 example, costs such as advertising are not
 customer-specific. These costs must be al-
 located rather than traced to individual cus-
 tomers (Foster et al, 1996: 11).
 Although many readers will take ex-
 ception to the notion that advertising
 costs are not customer-specific, we
 can agree that there are many costs
 that must be allocated rather than
 traced to individual customers if they
 are to be included in CP. Again, by
 design, our definition is silent with re-
 spect to how to assign costs to cus-
 tomer relationships.1
 DEFINING CUSTOMER LIFETIME
 VALUE
 Our definition of customer lifetime
 value is as follows:
 Customer Lifetime Value (CLV) is the pres-
 ent value of the future cash flows attributed
 to the customer relationship.
 For the reasons stated above, the def-
 inition connects the value in CLV to
 the finance concept of present value.
 In so doing, we are consistent with
 other definitions of customer lifetime
 value that mention "discounted,"
 "present value" or "taking into ac-
 count the time value of money."
 In keeping with the principles of fi-
 nance, the term "cash flows" is used
 to refer to what gets discounted. Most
 other descriptions of CLV do not use
 the term "cash flow." (Pfeifer and
 Carraway (2000) and Berger and
 Nasr (1998) are notable exceptions.)
 Instead, they tend to spell out com-
 ponents of cash inflows and outflows
 that are attributed to a typical cus-
 tomer relationship. We use cash flow
 as the most useful term here and
 leave it to the user to add the neces-
 sary specificity (i.e., to decide what
 are the specific cash inflows and out-
 flows attributed to the relationship in
 question).
 1 The accounting literature describes three methods firms use to allocate common costs to customers:
 (1) equally under the assumption there is no discernable differential benefit provided by the com-
 mon resources, (2) in proportion to a customer's ability to bear a portion of the common costs
 (e.g., higher sales levels, regardless of profitability, can shoulder a higher share of common costs),
 and (3) in proportion to some objectively determined benefit received from use of the common
 resource (e.g., activity-based costing methods). Conceptually, we subscribe to the latter approach.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 8 ---
 18 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 Examples of descriptions of CLV
 that would not be totally consistent
 with our definition include those put
 forth by Jain and Singh (2002), Niraj,
 Gupta, and Narahimhan (2001), and
 Hughes (1997) that all use "net
 profit." We say this because net profit
 can account for costs that are not
 cash flows (e.g., depreciation on a
 fleet of delivery trucks) . There are nu-
 merous other examples where a cost
 is not a current or future cash flow
 (see Brealey et al, 1995). So even
 though customer cash flows and cus-
 tomer profits will often be close, we
 prefer to allow for the cases where
 they are not. In addition, both the fi-
 nance and accounting disciplines as-
 sert that only cash flows (and not ar-
 ithmetic profit numbers) have a time
 value ascribable to them.
 Indeed, the idea that cash flows can
 sometimes be different from cus-
 tomer profits was recognized by Rei-
 chheld: ' 'First, to find the value of
 new customers, you have to know the
 annual profit pattern (or cash-flow
 pattern, if cash flow differs signifi-
 cantly from profits) that customers
 typically generate through the years"
 (1996: 50). We agree with Reichheld
 that it is always correct to discount
 cash flows and that cash flows from
 customers may not differ significantly
 from customer profits. To reiterate,
 we choose to use ''cash flow" in our
 definition so that it will always be cor-
 rect and to highlight an important
 distinction between CLV and CP.
 Where we disagree with Reichheld
 (1996) is in what to call the present
 value of cash flows from the customer
 relationship. Reichheld prefers the
 term net present value (NPV) to the
 term customer lifetime value: "Ad-
 mittedly, customer NPV doesn't roll off
 the tongue as easily as the more com-
 mon term, lifetime customer value, but
 that term has been used most often
 to mean lifetime revenue stream, as
 opposed to the discounted stream of
 profit net of acquisition investment"
 (1996: 224). As argued earlier, if the
 word value in CLV is to match the
 meaning of the word value in present
 value and financial valuation, then
 CLV is the perfect term for the pres-
 ent value of future cash flows attrib-
 uted to the customer relationship.
 Conversely, CLV should not be used
 to refer to the undiscounted sum of
 future revenues. (Nor should CLV be
 used to refer to the undiscounted
 sum of customer profitability as ad-
 vocated by Ness et al, 2001.) We
 would like to think this article will
 help eliminate the use of the term
 CLV when referring to undiscounted
 sums.
 We want to be clear that it is not
 always easy to decide what to include
 in the "cash flows attributed to the
 customer relationship." For exam-
 ple, consider general overhead. Over-
 head is usually a cash flow (supervi-
 sors get paid in cash, for example)
 that is mostly fixed in the short run
 and variable in the long run. So what
 portion of general overhead does one
 attribute to customer relationships?
 For another example, consider net-
 work effects. With network effects,
 the cash flows expected from one cus-
 tomer depend on how many other
 customer relationships the firm has.
 Network effects create dependencies
 among the firm's customer relation-
 ships that will make it difficult to at-
 tribute the firm's cash flows to indi-
 vidual customer relationships. The
 point here is to recognize that attrib-
 uting cash flows to the customer re-
 lationship can be a difficult task. By
 design, our definition leaves the attri-
 bution task to the user.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 9 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 19
 In addition to referring to "cash
 flows," our definition refers to "the"
 customer relationship. As such, the
 definition applies to an individual
 customer relationship. To extend the
 CLV concept to a group of customers,
 the user can talk about the average
 CLV for the group.
 In this same vein, because our def-
 inition uses "future cash flows," CLV
 will be uncertain whenever those fu-
 ture cash flows are uncertain. Thus, it
 makes sense for CLV to be a random
 variable in some contexts (see, for ex-
 ample, Pfeifer and Carraway, 2002)
 and to talk about the expected value
 of CLV (or the expected CLV) in oth-
 ers. (By "expected CLV" we mean
 the present value of the probability-
 weighted average of the set of poten-
 tial cash flow outcomes.) Because the
 present value (using an appropriate
 risk-adjusted discount factor) of ex-
 pected future cash flows is the finan-
 cial value of any risky asset, expected
 CLV will be the financial value of the
 customer relationship. In instances
 where the uncertainty in CLV can be
 ignored, "expected CLV" might be
 referred to as simply "CLV" with the
 understanding that the user is talking
 about the present value of expected
 cash flows.
 Let us also highlight the implica-
 tions of CLV being the present value of
 future cash flows. To make sense, the
 user must specify when "now" is. Not
 only does "now" determine how
 many periods to discount each cash
 flow, but "now" also determines
 which cash flows are in the future
 (and to be included) and which are
 in the past (to be excluded). This be-
 comes particularly important with re-
 spect to acquisition spending. A small
 change in the specification of "now"
 can push acquisition spending from
 the future to the past (from included
 in the present value to excluded from
 it) . We will have more to say about the
 treatment of acquisition spending in
 the next section.
 Finally, let us explain our choice of
 the term "present value" as opposed
 to "net present value." According to
 Brealey et al. (1995), the net present
 value of a project is the present value
 of project cash flows minus the initial
 investment. The word "net" is a sig-
 nal that an initial investment (at time
 zero) has been subtracted from the
 present value of the future cash flows.
 When applying CLV to an ongoing
 customer relationship, there may be
 no initial investment to net against
 the present value of future cash
 flow - in which case it makes little
 sense to talk about net present value.
 In contrast, if there is an initial cash
 outflow in the immediate future,
 treating it as a negative cash flow at
 time zero in a present value calcula-
 tion is equivalent to netting it out.
 THE TREATMENT OF
 ACQUISITION SPENDING
 As mentioned in the introduction,
 Jain and Singh (2002) address the
 treatment of acquisition spending in
 a recent review article on CLV. They
 argue that if a firm "spends a million
 dollars to attract customers [who]
 may never make a purchase after
 their first purchase" of a few dollars,
 then "clearly the lifetime value of
 such customers can not be positive"
 (2002: 16). Jain and Singh conclude
 that acquisition costs must be in-
 cluded in CLV. They go on to say that
 because Berger and Nasr (1998) did
 not include acquisition costs in CLV,
 Berger and Nasr "have an alternate
 interpretation of CLV as the maxi-
 mum profitable acquisition cost"
 (2002: 16). In short, Jain and Singh
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 10 ---
 20 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 suggest that because Berger and Nasr
 do not include acquisition costs, Ber-
 ger and Nasr have a different (and
 less correct) meaning for CLV.
 Although the implementation of
 CLV requires some judgment, we be-
 lieve the meaning of CLV should not.
 Instead, we argue that the precise def-
 inition of CLV offered here captures
 the essence of this important con-
 cept. The broad adoption of a com-
 mon definition should help resolve
 the apparent disagreement Jain and
 Singh have with the Berger and Nasr
 construction of CLV.
 To illustrate how our CLV defini-
 tion answers the question of whether
 acquisition spending should be in-
 cluded in CLV, consider a situation
 described in Blattberg and Deighton
 (1996). A firm plans to spend A dol-
 lars on a prospect in an attempt to
 acquire her as a new customer. The
 firm will be successful with probabil-
 ity a. If successful, the firm will im-
 mediately receive a cash inflow of M
 dollars from the new customer and
 will spend R dollars one period later
 to attempt to retain the customer.
 The firm will be successful with prob-
 ability r in its retention attempt. If
 successful, the firm again receives M
 dollars (one period from the initial
 outlay of the A dollars) and will spend
 another R dollars one period later
 (two periods from the initial outlay of
 the A dollars). The process will con-
 tinue until the event the customer is
 not retained. Let β be the discount
 factor (the inverse of one plus the dis-
 count rate) the firm will use to eval-
 uate this investment.
 All the elements needed to calcu-
 late the present value of expected fu-
 ture cash flows are in place, except
 for a specification of "now." We can
 think of at least four interesting spec-
 ifications of "now":
 (i) Right before the firm spends A on the
 prospect.
 (ii) Right after the firm spends A on the
 prospect and right before the firm receives
 M from the about-to-be-acquired customer,
 (iii) Right after the firm receives M from
 the newly acquired customer,
 (iv) Right after the firm spends R to retain
 the newly acquired customer and right be-
 fore the firm receives M from the success-
 fully retained customer.
 Notice that (i), (ii), and (iii) all hap-
 pen in a very short period of time. For
 the purposes of our analysis, assume
 (i), (ii), and (iii) all occur in quick
 succession at time t = 0. Thus for (i),
 (ii), and (iii), we will discount future
 cash flows an identical number of
 periods. The differences among the
 CLVs associated with (i), (ii), and
 (iii) will be in what is included in the
 first cash flow. In contrast, (iv) occurs
 one period later, at ί = 1. Conse-
 quently, the present values associated
 with (i), (ii), and (iii) all refer to a
 common time point, whereas the
 CLV associated with (iv) refers to a
 present value at a time point one pe-
 riod later.
 Blattberg and Deighton (1996)
 provide the equation for the ex-
 pected lifetime value for (i). It is a
 simple matter to derive the equations
 for the expected lifetime values for
 (ii), (iii), and (iv). These equations
 are given in Table 2 along with an ap-
 propriate label for what these ex-
 pected lifetime values represent. The
 point here is that all four equations
 are present values of expected cash
 flows attributed to a customer/pros-
 pect relationship. Thus, they all con-
 form to our definition of expected
 CLV but differ with respect to when
 is "now." Of course the nature (and
 value) of the relationship also
 changes with the specification of
 "now."
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 11 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 21
 Table 2. Expected Lifetime Values for Four Possible Specification
 Description of Now Expected Lifetime Value Appropriate Label
 Right B before Λ , Γ ßr 1 Expected Lifetime Value
 (i) Right B -A + aM+a(M-R/r) , -^- ßr [1]
 (t - 0) 'y~ Pr' of a Prospect
 (ii) After A and before M ^ I (^ RlA ßr 1 [2] E
 (t = 0) L ! ~ ßr J of a New Customer
 Expected Lifetime Value
 Γ ßr 1
 (iii) After M (/ = 0) {M -RI r)' -Ζ- [3] of a Just- Acquired
 Customer
 Ί Expected Lifetime Value
 {/?r -JL- [4]
 1 - pr J of a Retained Customer
 Expected lifetime value [1] applies
 to the prospect. That is why we prefer
 to call this the expected Prospect
 Lifetime Value (PLV) to distinguish
 it from CLV. So if "now" is before the
 firm spends A, then A should be in-
 cluded and the resulting expected
 value refers to the prospect, not the
 customer. The firm should spend A
 on the prospect if [1] is greater than
 zero.
 Expected value [2] applies to a new
 customer because "now" is specified
 as right before the receipt of M from
 the new customer. The firm should
 spend A on the prospect if a times the
 expected value of the new customer
 given by [2] is greater than A. (Equiv-
 alently, the firm should spend A if the
 expected value of CLV given by [2]
 exceeds A/a.) This decision rule is
 consistent with the earlier rule based
 on whether [1] was greater than zero.
 To summarize, acquisition spend-
 ing needs to be considered to make
 informed prospecting decisions.
 There are at least two ways to do this.
 Either do not include acquisition
 spending in the specification of CLV
 (and compare the expected value of
 CLV to A/a) or include acquisition
 spending in the specification of CLV,
 correctly label it as PLV, and compare
 the expected value of PLV to zero.
 Thus, for the Jain and Singh (2002)
 example of a firm spending a million
 dollars to attract a few customers who
 each spend a few dollars initially and
 none thereafter, our first approach
 would identify those prospects as hav-
 ing a negative expected PLV. Our sec-
 ond approach would acknowledge a
 small positive expected CLV, but not
 positive enough to offset the large A/
 a. (Spending a total of $1 million dol-
 lars to attract, say, ten customers im-
 plies an A/a value of approximately
 $100,000.) So we agree with Jain and
 Singh (2002) that the million dollars
 should not be spent. We might disa-
 gree, however, on whether the ex-
 pected CLV is positive. We would say
 expected CLV is positive if "now" is
 specified as right before the customer
 makes her first purchase. If "now" is
 specified as right before the firm
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 12 ---
 22 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 spends the million dollars, then the
 million-dollar spending applies to
 prospects, and the expected PLV will
 be negative.
 Expected value [3] applies to a just-
 acquired or current customer - some-
 one from whom the firm has just re-
 ceived M Notice that [3] equals [2]
 minus M The firm could also use [3]
 to make the prospecting decision with
 the rule to prospect if [3] is greater
 than A/a - M One might think of this
 rule as comparing the expected ' 'fu-
 ture" lifetime value of the new cus-
 tomer to the average "net" cost per
 acquisition.2 So this gives us a third way
 to make informed prospecting deci-
 sions based on specifying "now" to be
 after the receipt of the initial M from
 the new customer.
 The point of specification (iv) is to
 show that the constant margins, re-
 tention spending, and retention
 probabilities inherent in the Blatt-
 berg and Deighton (1996) model
 mean that the expected value of a re-
 tained customer is equal to the ex-
 pected value of a new customer. A
 new customer and a retained cus-
 tomer are identical in the Blattberg
 and Deighton (1996) model.
 Let us now turn to the treatment of
 acquisition spending with respect to
 CP. Consider again the million-dollar
 spending by the firm in the Jain and
 Singh (2002) example, and assume
 for convenience it results in ten new
 customers who each spend $5. The
 construction of CP for each of the ten
 customers for the initial period would
 start with the $5 revenue amount and
 then subtract a series of costs. The
 variable costs associated with the
 good/service itself and those in-
 curred in providing the good/servic
 would all be cash flows and appropr
 ately included in both CLV and CP.
 Fixed costs for the period (those tha
 did not vary with respect to the num-
 ber of customers) may or may not b
 cash flows to the firm, but would not
 be included in CLV in either case.
 These fixed costs, however, might be
 allocated to customers in the con-
 struction of CP. For example, costs
 such as depreciation of delivery vehi-
 cles and amortization of product pat-
 ents are not future cash flows and
 would never be included in CLV, but
 might be assigned to customers in the
 construction of a CP figure.
 Almost certainly the $1 million ac-
 quisition spending will be allocated to
 the ten customers in the period they
 were acquired. The $100,000 allo-
 cated acquisition cost per acquired
 customer would mean the CP for
 these ten customers in the initial pe-
 riod would be a large, negative num-
 ber. The ten customers would be
 deemed highly unprofitable in the in-
 itial period.
 This represents an important dif-
 ference between CLV and CP. For
 CP, the initial-period profitability
 number is likely to account for total
 acquisition spending allocated to the
 customers acquired. The acquired
 customers are burdened with acqui-
 sition spending "wasted" on the '-a
 fraction of the prospects who did not
 respond. Just as the profitability of
 productive oil wells are burdened
 with the costs incurred from drilling
 dry holes (under the "full-costing
 method" of generally accepted ac-
 2 Although one might think of A/a as the expected cost per acquisition, it is not entire
 do so. In return for spending A, the firm acquires 1 customer with probability a an
 with probability '-a. Consequently, the cost per acquisition is A with probability a and 
 ability 1-0. Thus, the expected cost per acquisition does not exist.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 13 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 23
 counting standards), so too are ac-
 quired customers burdened with
 spending directed at non-responding
 prospects in a measurement of prof-
 itability.
 As illustrated in Table 2, however,
 A/a (loosely interpreted as the aver-
 age cost per acquired customer) is
 not included in any of the four ex-
 pected lifetime value formulas. This
 is because A is a cash flow attributable
 to a prospect. It is included in [ 1 ] , the
 expected PLV. But A/a is not a cash
 flow attributable to an acquired cus-
 tomer. Although A/a is certainly rel-
 evant to the prospecting decision (we
 should prospect only if expected CLV
 according to [2] exceeds A/a), it is
 never included as a component of ex-
 pected CLV.
 SUMMARY
 The major purpose of this article is
 to make a clarifying distinction be-
 tween two of the most important
 terms in interactive marketing: cus-
 tomer lifetime value and customer profit-
 ability. Both of these terms are used to
 talk about one of the major advan-
 tages of interactive marketing: the
 ability to identify and capitalize on
 customer differences. Unfortunately,
 in the enthusiasm for identifying cus-
 tomer differences, interactive mar-
 keters have neglected to create a clear
 distinction in the meanings of these
 two terms.
 We offer concise definitions of the
 two terms with the intention of cre-
 ating and clarifying the distinction
 between the two. Our définition of
 CLV connects the word value in cus-
 tomer lifetime value to the word value
 in present value and valuation as used
 in finance theory. Our definition of
 CP connects the word profitability in
 customer profitability to the concept of
 accounting profitability. The differ-
 ences between present value and ac-
 counting profit are well understood
 in both finance and accounting. We
 propose the same distinctions be ap-
 plied to CLV and CP.
 Customer lifetime value is the pres-
 ent value of future cash flows,
 whereas customer profitability refers
 to an arithmetic calculation of reve-
 nues minus costs for a specified pe-
 riod of time. Thus, CP is usually an
 accounting summary of events from
 the present and past, whereas CLV is
 forward looking. Moreover, CLV re-
 lies on cash flows whereas CP relies
 on revenues and costs - neither of
 which may involve a cash flow in the
 period for which CP is measured.
 Cash flows must be attributed to
 the customer relationship in order to
 estimate CLV, whereas revenues and
 costs must be associated with the cus-
 tomer relationship in the construc-
 tion of CP. The former requires judg-
 ment as to what cash flows are
 relevant for the decision at hand,
 whereas the later requires judgment
 as to which costs to include and how
 to assign the included costs among
 the firm's customer relationships so
 as to give the most accurate break-
 down of total profit.
 A frequent goal in the construc-
 tion of CP is to assign revenues and
 costs to customers in such a way that
 the sum of the CPs of the firm's cus-
 tomers equals one of the firm's re-
 ported profit figures (e.g., operating
 profit, earnings from continuing op-
 erations) for the period in question.
 In contrast, the sum of the expected
 CLVs of the firm's current custom-
 ers is called the "value of the extant
 customer assets" by Hogan, Lemon,
 and Rust (2002). When this amount
 is added to the "value of potential
 customer assets" (the expected
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 14 ---
 24 Pfeifer, Haskins and Conroy
 value of the firm's current and fu-
 ture prospects), Hogan, Lemon, and
 Rust (2002) call the resulting sum
 "customer equity." If customer re-
 lationships are the only source of the
 firm's cash flows, then customer eq-
 uity so defined will equal the present
 value of the firm's expected future
 cash flows - that is, the value of the
 firm.
 Finally, the article discusses the
 treatment of acquisition spending. In
 particular, we address the issue raised
 by Jain and Singh (2002) of whether
 acquisition costs should or should not
 be included in CLV. Using our defi-
 nitions, acquisition spending will al-
 most certainly be included in CP but
 will not be included in expected CLV.
 This does not mean that acquisition
 spending should be ignored when
 making prospecting decisions. The
 firm should prospect only if the acqui-
 sition probability times the expected
 CLV exceeds the acquisition spending
 directed to the prospect, a decision
 rule equivalent to prospecting only if
 the expected PLV is positive.
 References
 Berger, P. D., R. N. Bolton, D. Bowman, E. Briggs, V. Eleten, V. Kumar, A. Pa
 suraman and C. Terry. 2002. "Marketing Actions and the Value of Custome
 Assets: A Framework for Customer Asset Management." Journal of Service Re-
 search 5 (1): 39-54.
 Applications. ' ' Journal of Interactive Marketin
 Blattberg, R. andj. Deighton. 1996. "Manage M
 Test." Harvard Business Review (Tulv-Auerust) : 136-144.
 Brealey, R. Α., S. C. Myers and A. J. Marcus. 1995. Fundamentals of Corporate Fi-
 nance. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
 FASB. 1985. Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6, Elements of Financial
 Statements. Stanford, CT: Financial Accounting Standards Board.
 Foster, G., M. Gupta and L. Sjoblom. 1996. "Customer Profitability Analysis:
 Challenges and New Directions." Journal of Cost Management 10: 5-17.
 Heskett,J. L., W. E. Sasser,Jr. and L. A. Schlesinger. 1997. The Service Profit Chain:
 How Leading Companies Link Profit and Growth to Loyalty, Satisfaction, and Value.
 New York, NY: The Free Press, pp. 61.
 Hogan, J. E., K. N. Lemon and R. T. Rust. 2002. "Customer Equity Management:
 Charting New Directions for the Future of Marketing." Journal of Service Re-
 search 5(1): 4-12.
 Hughes, A. M. 1997. "Customer Retention: Integrating Lifetime Value into Mar-
 keting: Strategies." Journal of Database Marketing 5 (2): 171-178.
 Jain, D. and S. S. Singh. 2002. "Customer Lifetime Value Research in Marketing:
 A Review and Further Directions." Journal of Interactive Marketing 16 (2): 34-
 46.
 Kaplan, R. S. and V. G. Narayanan. 2001. "Measuring and Managing Customer
 Profitability. " Journal of Cost Management (September/October): 5-15.
 Knie-Andersen, M. 2001. The Relationship Between Customer Satisfaction, Cus-
 tomer Loyalty and Customer Profitability." Denmark: University of Aarhus.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


--- Page 15 ---
 Customer Lifetime Value, Customer Profitability 25
 Kotier, P. 2002. Marketing Management, 11th Edition. Englewood Cliffs, N
 tice Hall, Inc.
 Mulhern, F. J. 1999. ''Customer Profitability Analysis: Measurement, 
 tion, and Research Directions." Tournai of Interactive Marketing 13(
 Ness, J. Α., Μ. J. Schroeck, R. A. Letendre and W. J. Douglas. 2001.
 of ABM in Measuring Customer Value." Strategic Finance (April): 44-
 Niraj, R., M. Gupta and C. Narahimhan. 2001. "Customer Profitability
 ply Chain." Journal of Marketing 65: 1-16.
 Peppers, D. and M. Rogers. 1997. Enterpnse One to One: Tools for Competin
 Interactive Acre. New York, NY: Currency Doubleday.
 Pfeifer, P. E. and R. L. Carraway. 2000. "Modeling Customer Relations
 Markov Chains." Journal of Interactive Marketing 14(2): 43-55.
 Reichheld, F. F. 1996. "The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden Force Behind Growth
 and Lasting Value." Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
 Harvard Business Review (September-October
 Rud, O. P. 2002. "CRM Special Report: Model C
 64-66.
 Schultz, D. E. 1995. "From the Editor: What is Direct Marketing?" Journal of
 Direct Marketing 9(2): 5-9.
 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVII Number 1 Spring 2005
This content downloaded from 
             188.113.93.84 on Mon, 13 Dec 2021 23:10:07 UTC              
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
