Dette materialet er vernet etter åndsverkloven og er helt eller 
delvis fremstilt etter avtale med Kopinor. Materialet kan benyttes 
av studenter som deltar i det aktuelle emnet, for egne studier, i et-
hvert format og på enhver plattform. Uten uttrykkelig samtykke er 
annen eksemplarfremstilling og tilgjengeliggjøring bare tillatt når 
det er hjemlet i lov (kopiering til privat bruk, sitat o.l.) eller avtale 
med Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
This material is protected by copyright law and is wholly or partly 
produced by agreement with Kopinor. The material can be used 
by students who participate in the relevant course, for their own 
studies, in any format and on any platform. Without expressed 
consent, other copying and making available is only permitted 
when authorized by law (copying for private use, quotation, etc.) 
or agreement with Kopinor (www.kopinor.no).
Digitalt framstilt av:
NTNU Universitetsbiblioteket
Utdraget er klarert i henhold til Kopinoravtalen for dette semesteret: VÅR 2024
Dingsøyr, T., Strode, D., & Lindsjørn, Y. (2022). Right Thoughts & Right Action: How to 
Make Agile Teamwork Effective. Amplify, 35(2), 12-17.


TRUST THY TEAM 
Right Thoughts & Right Action: 
How to Make Agile Teamwork Effective 
by Torgeir Dings0yr, Diane Strode, and Yngve Lindsj0rn 
Teamwork is critical in many industrial sectors. When 
creating complex software solutions, most companies 
and public institutions organize work within cross­
functional teams and follow the principles of Agile 
development. This approach to knowledge-intensive 
work seeks to empower team members, ensures that the 
most competent people make decisions, and manages 
uncertainty by allowing members to learn and adapt 
as work progresses. 
Agile methods offer much guidance on teamwork. 
The "Principles Behind the Agile Manifesto" highlight 
self-organized teams and face-to-face conversations 
which, according to the principles, is "the most efficient 
1 
and effective method of conveying information." More­
over, "a great development team," according to a white 
paper on scrum teams, "trusts each other" and "pursues 
technical excellence."2 
Advice is abundant. For example, Google's re:Work 
model offers advice to development teams in the form 
of five key factors for successful teams, including 
"psychological safety," "structure and clarity," and 
work that the team members consider meaningful.3 
There is also general advice from years of studies 
of teamwork and from empirical studies on Agile 
development teams. However, there has yet to be 
a model that draws together the knowledge from 
all these sources and specifically focuses on the 
effectiveness of Agile teamwork. 
To fill this gap, we have developed an Agile Teamwork 
4 
Effectiveness Model (ATEM). Our model is based on 
a review of empirical studies on Agile development 
teams, general studies of effective teams and teamwork, 
and practitioner advice. We also incorporated findings 
from our own two case studies and 22 focus groups. 
Though primarily intended for colocated Agile software 
development teams, the increasing adoption of Agile 
methods outside IT departments may make the model 
valuable for other Agile workplaces. 
12 
AMPLIFY 
Why Do We Need a Team 
Effectiveness Model? 
Team effectiveness refers to how team members inter­
act to accomplish their project's goals, while delivering 
quality work within budget and on schedule. Ineffective 
teamwork is detrimental - it can reduce job satisfac­
tion, interfere with team learning, generate knowledge 
and skill silos, and generally impede progress. 
Teamwork effectiveness models are based on accum­
ulated empirical observations and reasoned arguments, 
and identify and describe key factors necessary for 
effective teamwork. Our model, tailored for Agile 
practitioners, offers insights into effective Agile 
teamwork and explains how certain Agile practices 
support it. 
The ATEM builds on the Big Five model5 of team-
work effectiveness. It consists of three coordinating 
mechanisms that facilitate and support five teamwork 
components critical for team effectiveness (see Figure 1). 
The ATEM includes observable behaviors that prac­
titioners can use to evaluate teamwork effectiveness 
(see Table 1 - and Table 2, later in this article) and, if 
necessary, make informed decisions to improve it. 
Coordinating Teamwork 
The ATEM coordinating mechanisms - shared mental 
models, mutual trust, and communication - facilitate 
and support each other and the five components. For 
example, a team needs a shared mental model of the 
work to be done before assisting a team member 
struggling with workload issues (redundancy); a team 
needs mutual trust when offering peer feedback to 
avoid hurt feelings; and a team needs communication 
to develop the shared mental model and mutual trust. 
Communication is also vital for all five components of 
teamwork. 
©2022 Arthur D. Little 


TEAMWORK COMPONENTS 
Shared 
Peer 
Team 
Redundancy 
Adaptability 
Leadership 
feedback 
orientation 
COORDINATING MECHANISMS 
SHARED 
MUTUAL 
MENTAL 
COMMUNICATION 
TRUST 
MODELS 
Figure 1. The Agile Teamwork Effectiveness Model (ATEM) 
TEAMWORK COORDINATING MECHANISM 
TEAM BEHAVIORAL MARKERS 
Shared mental models 
• Anticipates and predicts each other's needs 
"An organizing knowledge structure of the 
relationships among the task the team is engaged 
• Shares common understanding of: goals, tasks, work 
process, product, individual skills, and expertise 
in and how the team members will interact." 
Mutual trust 
• Adheres to information sharing 
"Shared belief that team members will perform 
their roles and protect the interests of their 
• Is willing to admit mistakes and accept feedback 
• Supports team social climate 
teammates." 
Communication 
• Follows up on progress of tasks 
"The exchange of information between a sender 
and a receiver irrespective of the medium." 
• Visualizes project information 
• Facilitates informal communication 
•Definitions revised from Big Five model (Salas et al.); behavioral markers revised from ATEM 
Table 1. Coordinating mechanisms with behavioral markers in the ATEM 
Shared mental model refers to the common understanding 
that develops among team members over time as they 
become familiar with each other and the situation. 
Elements of a shared mental model might be: knowl­
edge of the skills/expertise held by team members 
and knowledge about the situation, the product, the 
development environment, the process to follow, and 
the way the team prefers to interact. 
An effective shared mental model thus helps coordinate 
a team, enables a smooth working environment, and 
ensures fewer interruptions, since team members will 
spend less time learning from each other by observing 
or asking (and answering) questions and more time on 
completing tasks. 
To evaluate a team's shared mental model, it's crucial 
to check whether team members can anticipate and 
Get The Cutter Edge free www.cutter.com 
predict each other's needs accurately. Do all the team 
members show knowledge of, or have the opportunity 
to find out, the goals, the current tasks, and the work 
process? Are they familiar enough with the product -
the stories, design, architecture, and codebase? Are they 
aware of each other's skills and expertise? When gaps 
in knowledge are found, focus on practices to fill those 
gaps. These include keeping teams together over time 
and integrating newcomers quickly, holding effective 
daily stand-up meetings and retrospectives, promot-
ing social activities like group lunches, utilizing pair 
programming and task boards, and creating an envi­
ronment where team members can readily express 
their knowledge, issues, and concerns and promote a 
common understanding. 
Mutual trust refers to the shared belief that team 
members will perform their work roles and protect the 
Vol. 35, No. 2 
AMPLIFY 
13 


interests of their teammates.6 This is critical for a team's 
7 
psychological safety (as in the re:Work model), which 
refers to a climate where people are comfortable being 
and expressing themselves. 
Mutual trust is especially important when teams are 
self-organizing and rely on empowered members. A 
lack of trust prompts more formal information sharing 
within the team. To support mutual trust, the team 
climate must enable its members to admit mistakes 
and accept feedback. An unsupportive climate can 
trigger greater individual orientation, more formal 
communication, and an increased hierarchical project 
structure. 
Shared leadership occurs when a team 
organizes itself to achieve goals. 
How can a lack of mutual trust be identified? A poor 
social climate is one where several conflicts are brewing 
and team members are actively avoiding each other. 
Issues remain unresolved and keep reappearing. A lack 
of mutual trust can occur when information transfer is 
formal and not open and when the team members are 
unwilling to admit mistakes and accept feedback. 
Communication refers to the exchange of information 
within the whole team and between individual team 
members - and is essential in any type of teamwork. 
A lack of open communication may hinder the sharing 
of knowledge along with the experience necessary for 
staying abreast of task progress, for offering feedback 
and support, for discussing issues and identifying 
solutions, and for understanding requirements/ 
architectures and translating them into software. 
Informal communication is the most effective way for 
Agile teams to share and discuss progress of tasks, 
so team members are often colocated to stimulate 
informal and open communication. This makes it 
easier to visualize information using project boards. 
A lack of communication can be identified by checking 
whether a team has open and informal communication. 
For a colocated team, examine, for example, the phys­
ical environment: Does the entire team work in a 
shared open plan office? Are there team rooms and 
open spaces that enable easy access to each team 
14 AMPLIFY 
member? Does the team share information openly using 
physical or virtual boards to visualize task progress, 
allocation, and dependencies? Does the team hold 
regular and unscheduled meetings to openly discuss 
issues and solutions? 
Components of Effective 
Agile Teamwork 
After establishing the coordinating mechanisms, a 
team must then establish the five key components 
for effective teamwork: shared leadership, peer 
feedback, redundancy, adaptability, and team 
orientation (see Table 2). According to our focus 
group material, development teams are not sufficiently 
aware of peer feedback and redundancy. 
Shared leadership occurs when a team organizes itself to 
achieve goals. In Agile teams, shared leadership can be 
evenly distributed, making everyone a leader, or 
rotated among team members based on expertise. Agile 
teams can also adopt a servant leadership style. In this 
approach, the servant leader initially empowers the 
team, then steps back. When the team has to interact 
with parties outside the team, such as stakeholders or 
others in the organization, the servant leader takes 
responsibility. 
Shared leadership is important because it creates 
effective Agile teams that are empowered and self­
organizing, allowing them to make decisions among 
themselves to set and meet the goals of the team and 
organization. 
Shared leadership is evident when the team solves 
problems together, determines performance expec­
tations and acceptable interaction patterns, and seeks 
and evaluates the information that affects how the team 
functions. Using Agile practices and automated tools, 
the team synchronizes and combines individual team 
member contributions and makes decisions together 
regarding the roles team members will take, the plans 
for product development, and the purpose and 
frequency of meetings. If these behaviors are lacking, 
then shared leadership should be improved. 
Peer feedback is the ability to give accurate feedback to 
team members based on a common understanding of 
the team environment. This component is important to 
correct any errors made by team members, especially 
in stressful situations. In a development team, errors 
might include a misunderstanding of user needs, 
©2022 Arthur D. Little 


• Facilitates team problem-solving 
"The ability of the team to direct and coordinate 
• Determines performance expectations and 
their activities, assess team performance, assign 
acceptable interaction patterns 
tasks, develop team knowledge, skills, and 
• Synchronizes and combines individual team member 
abilities, motivate one another, plan and 
contributions using Agile practices combined with 
organize, and establish a positive atmosphere." 
automated tools 
• Seeks and evaluates information that affects 
team functioning 
• Uses Agile values and methodologies to determine 
team member roles 
• Uses Agile values and methodologies to determine 
frequency and type of preparatory meetings and 
feedback sessions 
• Servant leader facilitates boundary-spanning 
function 
• Agile team practices provide planning function 
Peer feedback 
• Identifies mistakes and lapses in other team 
''The ability to develop common understandings 
members' actions 
of the team environment and based on those 
• Contributes regular feedback regarding team 
understandings to give accurate peer feedback 
members' actions to facilitate self-correction 
to team members." 
Redundancy 
• Recognizes workload distribution problem in team 
"The ability to anticipate other team members' 
• Shifts work responsibilities to underutilized team 
needs through accurate knowledge about their 
members 
responsibilities. This includes the ability to shift 
• Supports completion of whole task (or parts of tasks) 
workload among members to achieve balance 
by other team members 
during high periods of workload or pressure." 
Adaptability 
• Identifies cues that a change has occurred, assigns 
"The ability to adjust strategies based on 
meaning to that change, and develops new plan to 
information gathered from the environment 
deal with the change 
through the use of backup behavior and 
• Identifies opportunities for improvement and 
reallocation of intra-team resources. Altering a 
innovation for habitual or routine practices 
course of action or team repertoire in response 
• Remains vigilant to changes in the Internal and 
to changing conditions (internal or external)." 
Team orientation 
"The propensity to take others' behavior into 
account during group interaction and the belief 
in the importance of team's goals over individual 
members' goals." 
*Definitions revised from Big Five model (Salas et al.
Tab le 2. Teamwork components 
external environment of the team 
• Considers alternative solutions provided by 
teammates and appraises that input to determine 
what is most correct 
• Performs increased task involvement, information 
sharing, strategizing, and participatory goal setting 
• Sticks together and remains united 
); behavioral markers revised from ATEM 
with behavioral markers in the AT EM 
developing code that is not aligned with the team's 
design decisions, or introducing errors in the new 
code or the existing codebase. Self-correction based on 
internal feedback is likely to be more efficient, quicker, 
and more useful than correction from stakeholders 
Get The Cutter Edge free www.cutter.com 
outside the team. Moreover, receiving late feedback on 
errors can generate extra work; a developer might have 
already moved on to new tasks and will need additional 
time to recall the context of the error. 
Vol. 35, No. 2 
AMPLIFY 
15 


A team can use peer feedback to identify its mistakes 
and offer regular feedback to its members so they 
can self-correct. Such feedback is typically given in 
meetings when demonstrating the product, when 
discussing improvements in a retrospective, or when 
working closely together (e.g., pair programming). 
Peer feedback can also be given indirectly through, 
for example, automated code testing. A lack of such 
arenas for feedback indicates a need to improve team 
effectiveness. 
Team orientation is important because it 
means the team is focused on working 
together to achieve a single goal rather 
than on their individual goals. 
Redundancy means that team members have insight into 
the workload of teammates and use that knowledge 
to rebalance and reallocate tasks when necessary. 
For redundancy, knowledge of each team member's 
responsibilities is needed. When teams lack redun­
dancy, they cannot readily reallocate their workloads. 
If workloads rise, some members will work too much, 
and others not enough. Over time, this can threaten a 
team's sustainable work pace. 
Insufficient progress on tasks or the number of 
unfinished tasks worked on in parallel may signal a 
lack of redundancy. A team with good redundancy 
recognizes its workload distribution problems, shifts 
task responsibilities, and relieves team members under 
pressure by reallocating tasks or subtasks to other 
members. 
Adaptability refers to a team's ability to adjust its 
behavior and actions to accommodate changes in the 
internal or external environment by using the available 
resources. Adaptable teams accommodate changes that 
impact their efforts, and sidestep effects that harm their 
performance and hinder goal completion. For example, 
a team unable to adapt to changing requirements could 
waste time working on the wrong problem. When faced 
with a technological change, a team must be able to 
adapt by rapidly learning new technology or risk 
becoming less effective. 
To evaluate team adaptability, check whether the 
team takes an interest in the internal or external future 
16 AMPLIFY 
events that could affect it. Does the team know the 
organizational strategy and plans so it can identify 
potential change? When changes occur, are there arenas 
to discuss them and plan suitable adjustments? 
Team orientation refers to the consideration of other team 
members' behavior when the team interacts and the 
belief that the goals of the team are more important 
than the goals of the individual team members. Unlike 
other teamwork components, team orientation is about 
attitudes rather than behaviors. 
Team orientation is important because it means the 
team is focused on working together to achieve a single 
goal, rather than the individual goals of each team 
member. An individual orientation puts the benefits 
of teamwork at risk. Without team orientation, heavily 
interdependent tasks will become harder to complete, 
and changes to plans may cause the team to struggle. 
Moreover, rigid roles at the team level can result in 
team members not engaging in certain tasks and goals; 
for example, a dedicated test role on a development 
team might lead to others not taking responsibility for 
the tasks associated with this role. 
As an attitudinal dimension, team orientation might be 
easier to evaluate based on feedback. A lack of team 
orientation is evident when team priorities are not 
considered while choosing work tasks, when there 
is a lack of interest in offering peer feedback, when 
assistance is not given to team members with too much 
workload, or when there is a lack of cohesion. 
How ATEM Can Improve Teamwork 
The ATEM is useful in three ways: 
1. 
In colocated Agile teams, facilitators, Agile coaches, 
and team members can better understand their 
teamwork by regularly reflecting on how they 
meet each factor in the model ( e.g., during 
retrospectives). They can use the behavioral 
markers to evaluate their teamwork and help 
identify challenges and ways to improve their 
teamwork. 
2. 
Parts of the model may be relevant in contexts 
beyond single, colocated Agile software develop­
ment teams. What would differ among a very small 
team, a distributed team, a multi-team, and teams 
doing safety-critical development? A very small 
team will find it reasonably easy to develop the 
©2022 Arthur D. Little 


coordinating mechanisms; a distributed team 
will need to invest more time to develop an 
infrastructure that enables good coordinating 
mechanisms; a team in a multi-team setting 
would need to ensure that it develops effective 
coordinating mechanisms with other teams; and 
teams making safety-critical software would need a 
special emphasis on peer feedback to reduce errors. 
3. 
This model is applicable even if you are on an Agile 
team not doing software development. If your work
is knowledge-intensive and similar to software 
development, or involves many dependencies 
between work tasks, and if your task priorities 
change frequently with changes in customer needs 
or available technology, then ATEM should fit. 
However, if the context is more traditional, 
we recommend the original Big Five model. 
Using ATEM will direct attention to key team 
effectiveness factors and offer the right thoughts 
that enable the right action for Agile teams. 
 
Acknowledgments 
We are grateful to the band Franz Ferdinand. Our title 
comes from their album Right Words, Right Thoughts, 
Right Action.8 Our forthcoming article in Empirical 
Software Engineering includes further acknowledgment 
regarding research funding.9 We are also grateful to 
the following people who provided comments on 
earlier versions of the manuscript: Anastasiia Tkalich 
at SINTEF Digital, Marit Larsen at TechnipFMC 
Norway, and Kristin Wulff at Kantega and the 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology. 
References 
1"Principles Behind the Agile Manifesto," accessed February 
2022. 
2Overeem, Barry. "Characteristics of a Great Scrum Team." 
InfoQ, 15 April 2016. 
Get The Cutter Edge free www.cutter.com 
3Duhigg, Charles. "What Google Learned from Its Quest to 
Build the Perfect Team." The New York Times Magazine, 
25 February 2016. 
4Strode, Diane, Torgeir Dingseyr, and Yngve Lindsj0fll. 
"A Teamwork Effectiveness Model for Agile Software 
Development." Empirical Software Engineering, forthcoming, 
2022. 
5Salas, Eduardo, Dana E. Sims, and C. Shawn Burke. "Is There a 
'Big Five' in Teamwork?" Small Group Research, Vol. 36, No. 5, 
1 October 2005. 
6Salas et al. ( see 5). 
7Edmondson, Amy C. "Psychological Safety, Trust, and 
Leaming in Organizations: A Group-Level Lens." In Trust 
and Distrust in Organizations: Dilemmas and Approaches, edited 
by Roderick M. Kramer and Karen S. Cook. Russell Sage 
Foundation, April 2007. 
8Franz Ferdinand. "Right Action (Official Video)." YouTube, 
7 July 2013. 
9Strode et al. (see 4). 
Torgeir Dings0yr is a Professor in the Department of Computer 
Science at Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Norway, and an adjunct Chief Research Scientist at SimulaMet 
research laboratory. Dr. Dings0yr's research focuses on teamwork 
and learning in software development and Agile methods for large 
software projects and programs. He has been published in the areas of 
software engineering, information systems, and project management. 
Dr. Dings0yr earned a PhD from NTNU. He can be reached at 
torgeir.dingsoyr@ntnu.no. 
Diane Strode is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Information 
Technology, Whitireia Polytechnic, New Zealand, and a research 
fellow at Open University, UK. She also has experience as a software 
developer for Mobil Oil Australia. Dr. Strode's research centers on 
Agile software development and coordination. She has been published 
in the areas of information systems and software engineering. Dr. 
Strode earned a PhD from Victoria University of Wellington, New 
Zealand. She can be reached at Diane.Strode@whitireia.ac.nz. 
Yngve Lindsj0rn is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Informatics at the University of Oslo, Norway. He spent 10 years as 
a researcher at the Norwegian Computing Center and has 13 years' 
industry experience as a project manager and CEO of a software 
company. Previously, Mr. Lindsj0rn was project manager for a 
research project investigating teamwork in software development. 
His research includes software development methods and teamwork 
factors that influence software project success. He can be reached at 
ynglin@ifi.uio.no. 
Vol. 35, No. 2 
AMPLIFY 
17 
