 
FREE ONLINE EDITION 
 
 
If you like the book, please support  
the authors and InfoQ by  
purchasing the printed book: 
http://www.lulu.com/content/7731694  
 (only $22.95) 
 
Brought to you  
Courtesy of 
  
 
 
 
This book is distributed for free on InfoQ.com, if 
you have received this book from any other 
source then please support the authors and the 
publisher by registering on InfoQ.com. 
 
Visit the homepage for this book at: 
 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 
 


 
 
Kanban and Scrum - 
making the most of both 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Henrik Kniberg & Mattias Skarin 
Forewords by Mary Poppendieck & David Anderson 
 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 C4Media Inc. 
All rights reserved. 
 
C4Media, Publisher of InfoQ.com. 
 
This book is part of the InfoQ Enterprise Software Development 
series of books. 
 
For information or ordering of this or other InfoQ books, please 
contact books@c4media.com. 
 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recoding, scanning or otherwise except 
as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States 
Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of the Publisher. 
 
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are 
often claimed as trademarks. In all instances where C4Media Inc. 
is aware of a claim, the product names appear in Initial Capital or 
ALL CAPITAL LETTERS. Readers, however, should contact the 
appropriate companies for more complete information regarding 
trademarks and registration. 
 
Managing Editor: Diana Plesa 
Cover art: Bistrian IOSIP 
Composition: Accurance 
 
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data: 
ISBN: 978-0-557-13832-6 
 
Printed in the United States of America 


 
iii 
Contents 
FOREWORD BY MARY POPPENDIECK .......................................... v 
FOREWORD BY DAVID ANDERSON .............................................. vii 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................... xi 
PART I – COMPARISON ....................................................................... 1 
1. What is Scrum and Kanban anyway? .................................................. 3 
2. How do Scrum and Kanban relate to each other?................................ 7 
3. Scrum prescribes roles ....................................................................... 11 
4. Scrum prescribes timeboxed iterations .............................................. 13 
5. Kanban limits WIP per workflow state, Scrum limits WIP per 
iteration .............................................................................................. 15 
6. Both are empirical ............................................................................. 17 
7. Scrum resists change within an iteration ........................................... 23 
8. Scrum board is reset between each iteration ..................................... 25 
9. Scrum prescribes cross-functional teams .......................................... 27 
10. Scrum backlog items must fit in a sprint ........................................... 29 
11. Scrum prescribes estimation and velocity ......................................... 31 
12. Both allow working on multiple products simultaneously ................ 33 
13. Both are Lean and Agile .................................................................... 35 
14. Minor differences .............................................................................. 37 
15. Scrum board vs Kanban board – a less trivial example ..................... 41 
16. Summary of Scrum vs Kanban .......................................................... 49 
PART II – CASE STUDY ...................................................................... 53 
17. The nature of technical operations .................................................... 55 
18.  Why on earth change? ....................................................................... 57 
19.  Where do we start? ............................................................................ 59 
20.  Getting going ..................................................................................... 61 
21.  Starting up the teams ......................................................................... 63 
22.  Addressing stakeholders .................................................................... 64 
23.  Constructing the first board ............................................................... 67 
24.  Setting the first Work In Progress (WIP) limit .................................. 71 


KANBAN AND SCRUM - MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
iv 
25.  Honoring the Work In Progress (WIP) limit ..................................... 73 
26.  Which tasks get on the board? .......................................................... 75 
27.  How to estimate? ............................................................................... 77 
28.  So how did we work, really? ............................................................. 79 
29.  Finding a planning concept that worked ........................................... 83 
30.  What to measure? .............................................................................. 87 
31.  How things started to change ............................................................ 91 
32.  General lessons learned ..................................................................... 97 
FINAL TAKE-AWAY POINTS ......................................................... 101 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS ................................................................... 103 
 


 
v 
 
Foreword by Mary Poppendieck 
Henrik Kniberg is one of those rare people who can extract the essence of 
a complicated situation, sort out the core ideas from the incidental 
distractions, and provide a crystal clear explanation that is incredibly easy 
to understand. In this book, Henrik does a brilliant job of explaining the 
difference between Scrum and Kanban.  He makes it clear that these are 
just tools, and what you really want to do is have a full toolkit, understand 
the strengths and limitations of each tool and how to use them all. 
In this book you will learn what Kanban is all about, its strengths and 
limitations, and when to use it. You will also get a good lesson on how 
and when to improve upon Scrum, or any other tool you may happen to be 
using. Henrik makes it clear that the important thing is not the tool you 
start with, but the way you constantly improve your use of that tool and 
expand your toolset over time. 
The second part of this book by Mattias Skarin makes the book even more 
effective by walking you through the application of Scrum and Kanban in 
a real life situation. Here you will see an example of how the tools were 
used both separately and in combination to improve a software 
development process. You will notice that there isn’t a single “best” way 
to do things; you have to think for yourself and figure out – based on your 
situation – your next step toward better software development. 
Mary Poppendieck


 
vii 
 
Foreword by David Anderson 
Kanban is based on a very simple idea. Work In Progress (WIP) should be 
limited and something new should be started only when an existing piece 
of work is delivered or pulled by a downstream function. The kanban (or 
signal card) implies that a visual signal is produced to indicated that new 
work can be pulled because current work does not equal the agreed limit. 
This doesn’t sound very revolutionary nor does it sound like it would 
profoundly affect the performance, culture, capability and maturity of a 
team and its surrounding organization. What’s amazing is that it does! 
Kanban seems like such a small change and yet it changes everything 
about a business. 
What we’ve come to realize about Kanban is that it is an approach to 
change management. It isn’t a software development or project 
management lifecycle or process. Kanban is an approach to introducing 
change to an existing software development lifecycle or project 
management methodology. The principle of Kanban is that you start with 
whatever you are doing now. You understand your current process by 
mapping the value stream and then you agree to WIP limits for each stage 
in that process. You then start to flow work through the system by pulling 
it when kanban signals are generated. 
Kanban is proving useful to teams doing Agile software development but 
equally it is gaining traction with teams taking a more traditional 
approach. Kanban is being introduced as part of a Lean initiative to morph 
the culture of organizations and encourage continuous improvement. 
Because WIP is limited in a Kanban system, anything that becomes 
blocked for any reason tends to clog up the system. If enough work items 
become blocked the whole process grinds to a halt. This has the effect of 
focusing the whole team and the wider organization on solving the 
problem, unblocking the item and restoring flow. 


KANBAN AND SCRUM - MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
viii 
Kanban uses a visual control mechanism to track work as it flows through 
the various stages of the value stream. Typically, a whiteboard with sticky 
notes, or an electronic card wall system, is used. The best practice is 
probably to do both. The transparency that this generates also contributes 
to cultural change. Agile methods have been good about providing 
transparency into the WIP, completed work and reporting metrics such as 
velocity (the quantity of work done in an iteration). However, Kanban 
goes a step further and provides transparency into the process and its 
flow. Kanban exposes bottlenecks, queues, variability and waste – all of 
which are things which impact the performance of the organization in 
terms of the quantity of valuable work delivered and the cycle time 
required to deliver it. Kanban provides team members and external 
stakeholders with visibility into the effect of their actions (or inactions.) 
As such, early case studies are showing that Kanban changes behavior and 
encourages greater collaboration within the workplace. The visibility into 
and impact on bottlenecks, waste and variability also encourages 
discussion about improvements, and teams quickly start implementing 
improvements to their process. 
As a result, Kanban encourages incremental evolution of existing 
processes and evolution that is generally aligned with Agile and Lean 
values. Kanban does not ask for a sweeping revolution of how people 
work, rather it encourages gradual change. It’s change that is understood 
and agreed by consensus amongst the workers and their collaborators. 
Through the nature of the pull system, Kanban also encourages delayed 
commitment on both prioritization of new work and delivery of existing 
work. Typically, teams will agree to a prioritization cadence for meeting 
with upstream stakeholders and decide what to work on next. These 
meetings can be held often because they are usually very short. A very 
simple question has to be answered, e.g. “Since our last meeting two slots 
have become free. Our current cycle time is 6 weeks to delivery. Which 2 
things would you most like delivered 6 weeks from now?” This has a two-
fold affect: asking a simple question generally in a quickly-derived, high-
quality answer and also keeps the meeting short. The nature of question 
means that commitment on what to work on is delayed until the last 
responsible moment. This improves agility by managing expectations, 
shortening cycle times from commitment to delivery and eliminating 
rework since the chance that priorities will change is minimized. 


INTRODUCTION  
ix 
One final word on Kanban is that the effect of limiting WIP provides 
predictability of cycle time and makes deliverables more reliable. The 
“stop the line” approach to impediments and bugs also appears to 
encourage very high levels of quality and a rapid drop in rework. 
While all of this will become evident from the wonderfully clear 
explanations in this book, how we got here will remain opaque. Kanban 
was not conceived in a single afternoon through some incredible epiphany 
- instead it emerged over several years. Many of the profound 
psychological and sociological effects that change the culture, capability 
and maturity of organizations were never imagined. Rather, they were 
discovered. Many of the results with Kanban are counter-intuitive. What 
appears to be a very mechanical approach – limit WIP and pull work – 
actually has profound effects on people and how they interact and 
collaborate with one another.  I, nor anyone else involved with Kanban in 
the early days, anticipated this. 
I pursued what became Kanban as an approach to change which would 
meet with minimal resistance. This was clear to me as early as 2003. I 
also pursued it for the mechanical benefits. As I was discovering through 
application of Lean techniques around that time, if managing WIP made 
sense, then limiting it made more sense: it took the management overhead 
out of managing it. So in 2004, I decided to try implementing a pull 
system from first principles. I got the opportunity when a manager at 
Microsoft approached me and asked me to help him manage change on 
his team doing maintenance upgrades on internal IT applications. The first 
implementation was based on the Theory of Constraints pull system 
solution known as Drum-Buffer-Rope. It was a huge success: cycle time 
dropped by 92%; throughput increased by more than 3 times; and 
predictability (due date performance) was a very acceptable 98%. 
In 2005, Donald Reinertsen persuaded me to implement a full-blown 
Kanban system. I got the opportunity in 2006 when I took charge of the 
software engineering department at Corbis in Seattle. In 2007, I began to 
report the results. The first presentation was at the Lean New Product 
Development Summit in Chicago in May 2007. I followed this with an 
open space at Agile 2007 in Washington DC in August that year. 25 
people attended and 3 of them were from Yahoo!: Aaron Sanders, Karl 
Scotland and Joe Arnold. They went home to California, India and the UK 


KANBAN AND SCRUM - MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
x 
and implemented Kanban with their teams, which were already struggling 
with Scrum. They also started a Yahoo! discussion group which, at the 
time of this writing, has almost 800 members. Kanban was beginning to 
spread and early adopters were talking about their experiences. 
Now in 2009, Kanban is really growing in adoption and more and more 
field reports are coming in. We’ve learned a lot about Kanban in the past 
5 years and we all continue to learn more every day. I’ve focused my own 
work on doing Kanban, writing about Kanban, speaking about Kanban 
and thinking about Kanban in order to better understand it and explain it 
to others. I’ve deliberately stepped back from comparing Kanban to 
existing Agile methods, though some effort was spent in 2008 explaining 
why Kanban deserved to be considered an Agile-compatible approach. 
I’ve left it to others with a wider experience to answer questions like 
“How does Kanban compare to Scrum?” I am so glad that Henrik Kniberg 
and Mattias Skarin have emerged as leaders in this regard. You, the 
knowledge worker in the field, need information in order to make 
informed decisions and move forward with your work. Henrik and 
Mattias are serving your needs in a way that I never could. I am 
particularly impressed with Henrik’s thoughtful approach to comparison 
and his factual and un-opinionated, balanced delivery. His cartoons and 
illustrations are particularly insightful and often save you reading many 
pages of text. Mattias’ field case study is important because it 
demonstrates that Kanban is much more than theory and it shows you by 
example how it might be useful for you in your organization. 
I hope that you enjoy this book comparing Kanban with Scrum and that it 
gives you greater insight into Agile in general and both Kanban and 
Scrum in particular. If you would like to learn more about Kanban please 
visit 
our 
community 
website, 
The 
Limited 
WIP 
Society, 
http://www.limitedwipsociety.org/ 
David J. Anderson 
Sequim, Washington, USA 
July 8th, 2009 


 
xi 
 
Introduction 
We don’t normally write books. We prefer spending our time deep in the 
trenches helping clients optimize, debug, and refactor their development 
process and organization. We’ve noticed a clear trend lately, though, and 
would like to share some thoughts on that. Here’s a typical case: 
• 
Jim: 
“Now we’ve finally gone all-out Scrum!” 
• 
Fred: “So how’s it going?” 
• 
Jim: 
“Well, it’s a lot better than what we had before...” 
• 
Fred: “...but?” 
• 
Jim: 
“... but you see we are a support & maintenance team.” 
• 
Fred: “yes, and?” 
• 
Jim: 
“Well, we love the whole thing about sorting priorities in 
a product backlog, self-organizing teams, daily scrums, 
retrospectives, etc....” 
• 
Fred: “So what’s the problem?” 
• 
Jim: 
“We keep failing our sprints” 
• 
Fred: “Why?” 
• 
Jim: 
“Because we find it hard to commit to a 2 week plan. 
Iterations don’t make to much sense to us, we just work 
on whatever is most urgent for today. Should we do 1 
week iterations perhaps?” 
• 
Fred: “Could you commit to 1 week of work? Will you be 
allowed to focus and work in peace for 1 week?” 


KANBAN AND SCRUM - MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
xii 
• 
Jim: 
“Not really, we get issues popping up on a daily basis. 
Maybe if we did 1 day sprints...” 
• 
Fred: “Do your issues take less than a day to fix?” 
• 
Jim: 
“No, they sometimes take several days” 
• 
Fred: “So 1-day sprints wouldn’t work either. Have you 
considered ditching sprints entirely?” 
• 
Jim: 
“Well, frankly, we would like that. But isn’t that against 
Scrum?” 
• 
Fred: “Scrum is just a tool. You choose when and how to use 
it. Don’t be a slave to it!” 
• 
Jim: 
“So what should we do then?” 
• 
Fred: “Have you heard of Kanban?” 
• 
Jim: 
“What’s that? What’s the difference between that and 
Scrum?” 
• 
Fred: “Here, read this book!” 
• 
Jim: 
“But I really like the rest of Scrum though, do I have to 
switch now?” 
• 
Fred: “No, you can combine the techniques!” 
• 
Jim: 
“What? How?” 
• 
Fred: “Just read on...” 


INTRODUCTION  
xiii 
Purpose of this book 
If you’re interested in agile software development you’ve probably heard 
about Scrum, and you may also have heard about Kanban. A question that 
we hear more and more often is “so what is Kanban, and how does it 
compare to Scrum?” Where do they complement each other? Are there 
any potential conflicts? 
The purpose of this book is to clear up the fog, so you can figure out 
how Kanban and Scrum might be useful in your environment. 
Let us know if we succeed! 


 
1 
Part I – Comparison 
This first part of the book is an attempt to make an objective and practical 
comparison of Scrum and Kanban. It is a slightly updated version of the 
original article “Kanban vs. Scrum” from April 2009. That article 
became popular, so I decided to turn it into a book and ask my colleague 
Mattias to spice it up with a “from the trenches” case study from one of 
our clients. Great stuff! Feel free to skip ahead to Part II if you prefer 
starting with the case study, I won’t be offended.  
Well, maybe just a little. 
/Henrik Kniberg 


 
3 
1 
What are Scrum and Kanban anyway? 
OK let’s try to summarize Scrum and Kanban in less than 100 words 
each. 
Scrum in a nutshell 
• 
Split your organization into small, cross-functional, self-
organizing teams. 
 
• 
Split your work into a list of small, concrete deliverables. Sort 
the list by priority and estimate the relative effort of each item. 
 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


4 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
• 
Split time into short fixed-length iterations (usually 1 – 4 weeks), 
with potentially shippable code demonstrated after each iteration. 
 
• 
Optimize the release plan and update priorities in collaboration 
with the customer, based on insights gained by inspecting the 
release after each iteration. 
• 
Optimize the process by having a retrospective after each 
iteration. 
So instead of a large group spending a long time building a big thing, 
we have a small team spending a short time building a small thing. But 
integrating regularly to see the whole. 
121 words... close enough. 
For more details check out “Scrum and XP from the Trenches”. The book 
is a free read online. I  know the author, he’s a nice guy :o) 
http://www.crisp.se/ScrumAndXpFromTheTrenches.html 
For more Scrum links check out http://www.crisp.se/scrum 
Kanban in a nutshell 
• 
Visualize the workflow 
o 
Split the work into pieces, write each item on a card and 
put on the wall. 
o 
Use named columns to illustrate where each item is in 
the workflow. 
• 
Limit Work In Progress (WIP) – assign explicit limits to how 
many items may be in progress at each workflow state. 


WHAT ARE SCRUM AND KANBAN ANYWAY? | 5 
 
• 
Measure the lead time (average time to complete one item, 
sometimes called “cycle time”), optimize the process to make 
lead time as small and predictable as possible. 
 
We collect useful Kanban links at: http://www.crisp.se/kanban 


 
7 
2 
How do Scrum and Kanban 
relate to each other? 
 
 
Scrum and Kanban are both process tools 
Tool = anything used as a means of accomplishing a task or purpose. 
Process = how you work. 
Scrum and Kanban are process tools in that they help you work more 
effectively by, to a certain extent, telling you what to do. Java is also a 
tool, it gives you a simpler way to program a computer. A toothbrush is a 
also a tool, it helps you reach your teeth so you can clean them. 
Compare tools for understanding, 
not judgment 
Knife or fork – which tool is better? 
 
Pretty meaningless question right? Because the answer depends on your 
context. For eating meatballs the fork is probably best. For chopping 
mushrooms the knife is probably best. For drumming on the table either 
will do fine. For eating a steak you probably want to use both tools 
together. For eating rice... well... some prefer a fork while others prefer 
chopsticks. 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


8 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
 
So when we compare tools we should be careful. Compare for 
understanding, not for judgment.  
No tool is complete, no tool is perfect 
Like any tools, Scrum and Kanban are neither perfect nor complete. They 
don’t tell you everything that you need to do, they just provide certain 
constraints & guidelines. For example, Scrum constrains you to have 
timeboxed iterations and cross-functional teams, and Kanban constrains 
you to use visible boards and limit the size of your queues. 
Interestingly enough, the value of a tool is that it limits your options. A 
process tool that lets you do anything is not very useful. We might call that 
process “Do Whatever” or how about “Do The Right Thing”. The “Do The 
Right Thing” process is guaranteed to work, it’s a silver bullet! Because if it 
doesn’t work, you obviously weren’t following the process :o) 
Using the right tools will help you succeed, but will not guarantee 
success. It's easy to confuse project success/failure with tool 
success/failure. 
• 
A project may succeed because of a great tool. 
• 
A project may succeed despite a lousy tool. 
• 
A project may fail because of a lousy tool. 
• 
A project may fail despite a great tool. 
Scrum is more prescriptive than Kanban 
We can compare tools by looking at how many rules they provide. 
Prescriptive means “more rules to follow” and adaptive means “fewer 
rules to follow”. 100% prescriptive means you don’t get to use your brain, 
there is a rule for everything. 100% adaptive means Do Whatever, there 
are no rules or constraints at all. As you can see, both extremes of the 
scale are kind of ridiculous. 


SO HOW DO SCRUM AND KANBAN RELATE TO EACH OTHER? | 9 
 
Agile methods are sometimes called lightweight methods, specifically 
because they are less prescriptive than traditional methods. In fact, the 
first tenet of the Agile Manifesto is “Individuals and Interactions over 
Processes and Tools”. 
Scrum and Kanban are both highly adaptive, but relatively speaking 
Scrum is more prescriptive than Kanban. Scrum gives you more 
constraints, and thereby leaves fewer options open. For example Scrum 
prescribes the use of timeboxed iterations, Kanban doesn’t. 
Let’s compare some more process tools on the prescriptive vs adaptive 
scale: 
 
RUP is pretty prescriptive – it has over 30 roles, over 20 activities, and 
over 70 artifacts; an overwhelming amount of stuff to learn. You aren’t 
really supposed to use all of that though; you are supposed to select a 
suitable subset for your project. Unfortunately this seems to be hard in 
practice. “Hmmmm... will we need Configuration audit findings artifacts? 
Will we need a Change control manager role? Not sure, so we better keep 
them just in case.” This may be one of the reasons why RUP 
implementations often end up quite heavy-weight compared to Agile 
methods such as Scrum and XP. 
XP (eXtreme Programming) is pretty prescriptive compared to Scrum. It 
includes most of Scrum + a bunch of fairly specific engineering practices 
such as test-driven development and pair programming. 


10 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Scrum is less prescriptive than XP, since it doesn’t prescribe any specific 
engineering practices. Scrum is more prescriptive than Kanban though, 
since it prescribes things such as iterations and cross-functional teams. 
One of the main differences between Scrum and RUP is that in RUP you 
get too much, and you are supposed to remove the stuff you don’t need. In 
Scrum you get too little, and you are supposed to add the stuff that is 
missing. 
Kanban leaves almost everything open. The only constraints are Visualize 
Your Workflow and Limit Your WIP. Just inches from Do Whatever, but 
still surprisingly powerful. 
Don’t limit yourself to one tool! 
Mix and match the tools as you need! I can hardly imagine a successful 
Scrum team that doesn’t include most elements of XP for example.  Many 
Kanban teams use daily standup meetings (a Scrum practice). Some Scrum 
teams write some of their backlog items as Use Cases (a RUP practice) or 
limit their queue sizes (a Kanban practice). Whatever works for you. 
Miyamoto Musashi a 17th century Samurai who was famous for his twin-
sword fighting technique, said it nicely: 
 
Pay attention to the constraints of each tool though. For example if you use 
Scrum and decide to stop using timeboxed iterations (or any other core 
aspect of Scrum), then don’t say you’re using Scrum. Scrum is minimalistic 
enough as it is, if you remove stuff and still call it Scrum then the word will 
become meaningless and confusing. Call it something like “Scrum-
inspired” or “a subset of Scrum” or how about “Scrumish” :o) 
-  Miyamoto Musashi 
Do not develop an attachment to 
any one weapon or any one 
school of fighting. 


 
11 
3 
Scrum prescribes roles 
Scrum prescribes 3 roles: Product Owner (sets product vision & 
priorities), Team (implements the product) and Scrum Master (removes 
impediments and provides process leadership). 
Kanban doesn’t prescribe any roles at all. 
That doesn’t mean you can’t or shouldn’t have a Product Owner role in 
Kanban! It just means you don’t have to. In both Scrum and Kanban you 
are free to add whatever additional roles you need. 
Be careful when adding roles though, make sure the additional roles 
actually add value and don’t conflict with other elements of the process. 
Are you sure you need that Project Manager role? In a big project maybe 
that’s a great idea, perhaps that’s the guy who helps to synchronize 
multiple teams & product owners with one another. In a small project that 
role might be waste, or worse, might lead to sub-optimization and 
micromanagement. 
The general mindset in both Scrum and Kanban is “less is more”. So 
when in doubt, start with less. 
In the rest of the book I’m going to use the term “Product Owner” to 
represent whoever it is that sets the priorities of a team, regardless of the 
process used. 


 
13 
4 
Scrum prescribes timeboxed iterations 
Scrum is based on timeboxed iterations. You can choose the length of the 
iteration, but the general idea is to keep the same length of iteration over a 
period of time and thereby establish a cadence. 
• 
Beginning of iteration: An iteration plan is created, i.e. team 
pulls out specific number items from the product backlog, based 
on the product owner’s priorities and how much the team thinks 
they can complete in one iteration. 
• 
During iteration: Team focuses on completing the items they 
committed to. The scope of the iteration is fixed. 
• 
End of iteration: Team demonstrates working code to the 
relevant stakeholders, ideally this code should be potentially 
shippable (i.e. tested and ready to go). Then the team does a 
retrospective to discuss and improve their process. 
So a Scrum iteration is one single timeboxed cadence combining three 
different activities: planning, process improvement, and (ideally) release. 
In Kanban timeboxed iterations are not prescribed. You can choose when 
to do planning, process improvement, and release. You can choose to do 
these activities on a regular basis (“release every Monday”) or on-demand 
(“release whenever we have something useful to release”). 
Team #1 (single cadence) 
“We do Scrum iterations” 
 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


14 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Team #2 (three cadences) 
“We have three difference cadences. Every week we release whatever is 
ready for release. Every second week we have a planning meeting and 
update our priorities and release plans. Every fourth week we have a 
retrospective meeting to tweak and improve our process” 
 
Team #3 (mostly event-driven) 
“We trigger a planning meeting whenever we start running out of stuff to 
do. We trigger a release whenever there is a set of Minimum Marketable 
Features (MMFs) ready for release. We trigger a spontaneous quality 
circle whenever we bump into the same problem the second time. We also 
do a more in-depth retrospective every fourth week.” 
 


 
15 
5 
Kanban limits WIP per workflow state, 
Scrum limits WIP per iteration 
In Scrum, the sprint backlog shows what tasks are to be executed during 
the current iteration (= “sprint” in Scrum-speak). This is commonly 
represented using cards on the wall, called a Scrum board or Task board. 
So what’s the difference between a Scrum board and a Kanban board? 
Let’s start with a trivially simple project and compare the two: 
 
 
In both cases we’re tracking a bunch of items as the progress through a 
workflow. We’ve selected three states: To Do, Ongoing, and Done. You 
can choose whatever states you like – some teams add states such as 
Integrate, Test, Release, etc. Don’t forget the less is more principle 
though. 
So what’s the difference between these two sample boards then? Yep - the 
little 2 in the middle column on the kanban board. That’s all. That 2 
means “there may be no more than 2 items in this column at any given 
moment”. 
In Scrum there is no rule preventing the team from putting all items into 
the Ongoing column at the same time! However there is an implicit limit 
since the iteration itself has a fixed scope. In this case the implicit limit 
per column is 4, since there are only 4 items on the whole board. So 
Scrum limits WIP indirectly, while Kanban limits WIP directly. 


16 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Most Scrum teams eventually learn that it is a bad idea to have too many 
ongoing items, and evolve a culture of trying to get the current items done 
before starting new items. Some even decide to explicitly limit the 
number of items allowed in the Ongoing column and then – tadaaa! – the 
Scrum board has become a Kanban board! 
So both Scrum and Kanban limit WIP, but in different ways. Scrum teams 
usually measure velocity – how many items (or corresponding units such 
as “story points”) get done per iteration. Once the team knows their 
velocity, that becomes their WIP limit (or at least a guideline). A team 
that has an average velocity of 10 will usually not pull in more than 10 
items (or story points) to a sprint. 
So in Scrum WIP is limited per unit of time. 
In Kanban WIP is limited per workflow state. 
In the above Kanban example, at most 2 items may be in the workflow 
state “Ongoing” at any given time, regardless of any cadence lengths. You 
need to choose what limit to apply to which workflow states, but the 
general idea is to limit WIP of all workflow states, starting as early as 
possible and ending as late as possible along the value stream. So in the 
example above we should consider adding a WIP limit to the “To do” 
state as well (or whatever you call your input queue). Once we have WIP 
limits in place we can start measuring and predicting lead time, i.e. the 
average time for an item to move all the way across the board. Having 
predictable lead times allows us to commit to SLAs (service-level 
agreements) and make realistic release plans. 
If the item sizes vary dramatically then you might consider having WIP 
limits defined in terms of story points instead, or whatever unit of size you 
use. Some teams invest effort in breaking down items to roughly the same 
size to avoid these types of considerations and reduce time spent on 
estimating things (you might even consider estimation to be waste). It’s 
easier to create a smooth-flowing system if items are roughly equal-sized. 


 
17 
6 
Both are empirical 
 
Imagine if there were knobs on these meters, and you could configure 
your process by simply turning the knobs. “I want high capacity, low lead 
time, high quality, and high predictability. So I’ll turn the knobs to 10, 1, 
10, 10 respectively.” 
Wouldn’t that be great? Unfortunately there are no such direct controls. 
Not that I know of at least. Let me know if you find any. 
Instead what we have is a bunch of indirect controls. 
 
Scrum and Kanban are both empirical in the sense that you are expected 
to experiment with the process and customize it to your environment. In 
fact, you have to experiment. Neither Scrum nor Kanban provide all the 
answers – they just give you a basic set of constraints to drive your own 
process improvement. 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


18 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
• 
Scrum says you should have cross-functional teams. So who 
should be on what team? Don’t know, experiment. 
• 
Scrum says the team chooses how much work to pull into a 
sprint. So how much should they pull in? Don’t know, 
experiment. 
• 
Kanban says you should limit WIP. So what should the limit be? 
Don’t know, experiment. 
As I mentioned earlier, Kanban imposes fewer constraints than Scrum. 
This means you get more parameters to think about, more knobs to turn. 
That can be both a disadvantage and an advantage depending on your 
context. When you open up the configuration dialog of a software tool, do 
you prefer having 3 options to tweak, or 100 options to tweak? Probably 
somewhere in between. Depends on how much you need to tweak and 
how well you understand the tool. 
So let’s say we reduce a WIP limit, based on the hypothesis that this will 
improve our process. We then observe how things like capacity, lead time, 
quality, and predictability change. We draw conclusions from the results 
and then change some more things, continuously improving our process. 
There are many names for this. Kaizen (continuous improvement in Lean-
speak), Inspect & Adapt (Scrum-speak), Empirical Process Control, or 
why not The Scientific Method. 
The most critical element of this is the feedback loop. Change something 
=> Find out how it went => Learn from it => Change something again. 
Generally speaking you want as short a feedback loop as possible, so you 
can adapt your process quickly. 
In Scrum, the basic feedback loop is the sprint. There are more, however, 
especially if you combine with XP (eXtreme programming): 
 


BOTH ARE EMPIRICAL | 19 
 
When done correctly, Scrum + XP gives you a bunch of extremely 
valuable feedback loops. 
The inner feedback loop, pair programming, is a feedback loop of a few 
seconds. Defects are found and fixed within seconds of creation ("Hey, 
isn't that variable supposed to be a 3?"). This is an "are we building the 
stuff right?" feedback cycle. 
The outer feedback loop, the sprint, gives a feedback cycle of a few 
weeks. This is a "are we building the right stuff?" feedback cycle. 
What about Kanban then? Well, first of all you can (and probably should) 
put all of the above feedback loops into your process whether or not you 
use Kanban. What Kanban then gives you is a few very useful real-time 
metrics: 
• 
Average lead time.  Updated every time an item reaches “Done” 
(or whatever you call your right-most column). 
• 
Bottlenecks. Typical symptom is that Column X is crammed with 
items while column X+1 is empty. Look for “air bubbles” on 
your board. 
The nice thing about real-time metrics is that you can choose the length of 
your feedback loop, based on how often you are willing to analyze the 
metrics and make changes. Too long feedback loop means your process 
improvement will be slow. Too short feedback loop means your process 
might not have time to stabilize between each change, which can cause 
thrashing. 
In fact, the length of the feedback loop itself is one of the things you can 
experiment with... sort of like a meta-feedback loop.  
OK I’ll stop now. 
Example: Experimenting with WIP limits in Kanban 
One of the typical “tweak points” of Kanban is the WIP limit. So how do 
we know if we got it right? 
Let’s say we have a 4 person team, and we decide to start with a WIP 
limit of 1. 


20 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
 
Whenever we start working on one item, we can’t start any new item until 
the first item is Done. So it will get done really quickly. 
Great! But then it turns out that it’s usually not feasible for all 4 people to 
work on the same item (in this sample context), so we have people sitting 
idle. If that only happens once in a while that’s no problem, but if it 
happens regularly, the consequence is that the average lead time will 
increase. Basically, WIP of 1 means items will get through “Ongoing” 
really fast once they get in, but they will be stuck in “To Do” longer than 
necessary, so the total lead time across the whole workflow will be 
unnecessarily high. 
So if WIP of 1 was too low, what about increasing it to 8? 
 
That works better for a while. We discover that, on average, working in 
pairs gets the work done most quickly. So with a 4 person team, we 
usually have 2 ongoing items at any given time. The WIP of 8 is just an 
upper limit, so having fewer items in progress is fine! 


BOTH ARE EMPIRICAL | 21 
 
Imagine now, however, that we run into a problem with the integration 
server, so we can’t fully complete any items (our definition of “Done” 
includes integration). That kind of stuff happens sometimes right? 
 
Since we can’t complete item D or E, we start working on item F. We 
can’t integrate that one either, so we pull in a new item G. After a while 
we hit our Kanban limit – 8 items in “Ongoing”: 
 
At that point we can’t pull in any more items. Hey we better fix that 
danged integration server! The WIP limit has prompted us to react and fix 
the bottleneck instead of just piling up a whole bunch of unfinished work. 
That’s good. But if the WIP limit was 4 we would have reacted a lot 
earlier, thereby giving us a better average lead time. So it’s a balance. We 
measure average lead time and keep optimizing our WIP limits to 
optimize the lead time: 


22 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
 
After a while we might find that items pile up in “To do”. Maybe it’s time 
to add a WIP limit there as well then. 
Why do we need a “To do” column anyway? Well, if the customer was 
always available to tell the team what to do next whenever they ask, then 
the “To do” column wouldn’t be needed. But in this case the customer is 
sometimes not available, so the “To Do” column gives the team a small 
buffer to pull work from in the meantime. 
Experiment! Or, as the Scrumologists say, Inspect & Adapt! 


 
23 
7 
Scrum resists change within an iteration 
Let’s say our Scrum board looks like this: 
 
What if someone turns up and wants to add E to the board? 
A Scrum team will typically say something like “No, sorry, we’ve 
committed to A+B+C+D this sprint. But feel free to add E to the product 
backlog. If the product owner considers it to be high priority we will pull 
this into next sprint.” Sprints of the right length give the team just enough 
focused time to get something done, while still allowing the product 
owner to manage and update priorities on a regular basis. 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


24 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
So what would the Kanban team say then? 
 
A Kanban might say “Feel free to add E to the To Do column. But the 
limit is 2 for that column, so you will need to remove C or D in that case. 
We are working on A and B right now, but as soon as we have capacity 
we will pull in the top item from To Do”. 
So the response time (how long it takes to respond to a change of 
priorities) of a Kanban team is however long it takes for capacity to 
become available, following the general principle of “one item out = one 
item in” (driven by the WIP limits). 
In Scrum, the response time is half the sprint length on average. 
In Scrum, the product owner can’t touch the Scrum board since the team 
has committed to a specific set of items in the iteration. In Kanban you 
have to set your own ground rules for who is allowed to change what on 
the board. Typically the product owner is given some kind of “To Do” or 
“Ready” or “Backlog” or “Proposed” column to the far left, where he can 
make changes whenever he likes. 
These two approaches aren’t exclusive though. A Scrum team may decide 
to allow a product owner to change priorities mid-sprint (although that 
would normally be considered an exception). And a Kanban team may 
decide to add restrictions about when priorities can be changed. A Kanban 
team may even decide to use timeboxed fixed-commitment iterations, just 
like Scrum. 


 
25 
8 
Scrum board is reset between 
each iteration 
A Scrum board typically looks something like this during different stages 
of a sprint. 
 
 
 
When the sprint is over, the board is cleared – all items are removed. A 
new sprint is started and after the sprint planning meeting we have a new 
Scrum board, with new items in the left-most column. Technically this is 
waste, but for experienced Scrum teams this usually doesn’t take too long, 
and the process of resetting the board can give a nice sense of 
accomplishment and closure. Sort of like washing dishes after dinner – 
doing it is a pain but it feels nice afterwards. 
In Kanban, the board is normally a persistent thing – you don’t need to 
reset it and start over. 
 


 
27 
9 
Scrum prescribes  
cross-functional teams 
A Scrum board is owned by exactly one Scrum team. A Scrum team is 
cross-functional, it contains all the skills needed to complete all the items 
in the iteration. A Scrum board is usually visible to whoever is interested, 
but only the owning Scrum team may edit it – it is their tool to manage 
their commitment for this iteration. 
 
In Kanban, cross-functional teams are optional, and a board doesn’t need 
to be owned by one specific team. A board is related to one workflow, not 
necessarily one team. 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


28 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Here are two examples: 
 
Example 1: The whole board is served by one cross-functional team.  Just 
like Scrum. 
 
Example 2: The product owner sets priorities in column 1. A cross-
functional development team does development (column 2) and test 
(column 3). Release (column 4) is done by a specialist team. There is 
slight overlap in competencies, so if the release team becomes a 
bottleneck one of the developers will help them. 
So in Kanban you need to establish some ground rules for who uses the 
board and how, then experiment with the rules to optimize flow. 


 
29 
10 
Scrum backlog items must fit in a sprint 
Both Scrum and Kanban are based on incremental development, i.e. break 
the work into smaller pieces. 
A Scrum team will only commit to items that they think they can 
complete within one iteration (based on the definition of “Done”).  If an 
item is too big to fit in a sprint, the team and product owner will try to 
find ways to break it into smaller pieces until it does fit. If items tend to 
be big, iterations will be longer (although usually no longer than 4 weeks). 
 
Kanban teams try to minimize lead time and level the flow, so that 
indirectly creates an incentive to break items into relatively small pieces. 
But there is no explicit rule stating that items must be small enough to fit 
into a specific time box.  On the same board we might have one item that 
takes 1 month to complete and another item that takes 1 day. 
 


 
31 
11 
Scrum prescribes  
estimation and velocity 
In Scrum, teams are supposed to estimate the relative size (= amount of 
work) of each item that they commit to. By adding up the size of each 
item completed at the end of each sprint, we get velocity. Velocity is a 
measure of capacity – how much stuff we can deliver per sprint.  Here’s 
an example of a team with an average velocity of 8. 
 
Knowing that the average velocity is 8 is nice, because then we can make 
realistic predictions about which items we can complete in upcoming 
sprints, and therefore make realistic release plans. 
In Kanban, estimation is not prescribed. So if you need to make 
commitments you need to decide how to provide predictability. 
Some teams choose to make estimates and measure velocity just like in 
Scrum. Other teams choose to skip estimation, but try to break each item into 
pieces of roughly the same size – then they can measure velocity simply in 
terms of how many items were completed per unit of time (for example 
features per week). Some teams group items into MMFs and measure the 
average lead time per MMF, and use that to establish Service-Level 
Agreements (SLAs) – for example “when we commit to an MMF it will 
always be delivered within 15 days”. 


32 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
There’s all kinds of interesting techniques for Kanban-style release 
planning and commitment management – but no specific technique is 
prescribed so go ahead and Google away and try some different 
techniques until you find one that suits your context. We’ll probably see 
some “best practices” emerge over time. 


 
33 
12 
Both allow working on multiple 
products simultaneously 
In Scrum, “Product Backlog” is a rather unfortunate name since it implies 
that all items have to be for the same product.  Here are two products, 
green and yellow, each with their own product backlog and their own 
team: 
 
What if you only have one team then? Well, think of Product Backlog 
more like a Team Backlog. It lists the priorities for upcoming iterations 
for one particular team (or set of teams). So if that team is maintaining 
multiple products, merge both products into one list. That forces us to 
prioritize between the products, which is useful in some cases.  
There are several ways of doing this in practice. One strategy would be to 
have the team focus on one product per sprint: 
 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


34 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Another strategy would be to have the team work on features from both 
products each sprint: 
 
It’s the same in Kanban. We can have several products flowing across the 
same board. We might distinguish them using different colored cards: 
 
... or by having “swimlanes” : 
 


 
35 
13 
Both are Lean and Agile 
I’m not going to go through Lean Thinking and the Agile Manifesto here, 
but generally speaking both Scrum and Kanban are well aligned with 
those values and principles. For example: 
• 
Scrum and Kanban are both pull scheduling systems, which 
corresponds to the JIT (Just In Time) inventory management 
principle of Lean. This means that the team chooses when and 
how much work to commit to, they “pull” work when they are 
ready, rather than having it “pushed” in from the outside. Just 
like a printer pulls in the next page only when it is ready to print 
on it (although there is a small & limited batch of paper that it 
can pull from). 
• 
Scrum and Kanban are based on continuous and empirical process 
optimization, which corresponds to the Kaizen principle of Lean. 
• 
Scrum and Kanban emphasize responding to change over 
following a plan (although Kanban typically allows faster 
response than Scrum), one of the four values of the agile 
manifesto. 
... and more. 
From one perspective Scrum can be seen as not-so-lean because it 
prescribes batching items into timeboxed iterations. But that depends on 
the length of your iteration, and what you are comparing to. Compared to 
a more traditional process where we perhaps integrate and release 
something 2 – 4 times per year, a Scrum team producing shippable code 
every 2 weeks is extremely lean. 
But then, if you keep making the iteration shorter and shorter you are 
essentially approaching Kanban. When you start talking about making the 
iteration shorter than 1 week you might consider ditching timeboxed 
iterations entirely. 


36 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
I’ve said it before and I’ll keep saying it: Experiment until you find 
something that works for you! And then keep experimenting :o) 


 
37 
14 
Minor differences 
Here are some differences that seem to be less relevant compared to the 
other ones mentioned before. It’s good to be aware of them though. 
Scrum prescribes a prioritized 
product backlog 
In Scrum, prioritization is always done by sorting the product backlog, 
and changes to priorities take effect in the next sprint (not the current 
sprint). In Kanban you can choose any prioritization scheme (or even 
none), and changes take effect as soon as capacity becomes available 
(rather than at fixed times). There may or may not be a product backlog, 
and it may or may not be prioritized. 
In practice, this makes little difference. On a Kanban board the left-most 
column typically fulfills the same purpose as a Scrum product backlog. 
Whether or not the list is sorted by priority, the team needs some kind of 
decision rule for which items to pull first. Examples of decision rules: 
• 
Always take the top item. 
• 
Always take the oldest item (so each item has a timestamp). 
• 
Take any item. 
• 
Spend approximately 20% on maintenance items and 80% on 
new features. 
• 
Split the team’s capacity roughly evenly between product A and 
product B. 
• 
Always take red items first, if there are any. 
In Scrum, a product backlog can also be used in a Kanban-ish way. We 
can limit the size of it, and create decision rules for how it should be 
prioritized. 


38 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
In Scrum, daily meetings are prescribed 
A Scrum team has a short meeting (at most 15 minutes) every day at the 
same time & same place. The purpose of the meeting is to spread 
information about what is going on, plan the current day’s work, and 
identify any significant problems. This is sometimes called a daily 
standup, since it is usually done standing (to keep it short & maintain a 
high energy level). 
Daily standups are not prescribed in Kanban, but most Kanban teams 
seem to do it anyway. It’s a great technique, regardless of which process 
you use. 
In Scrum the format of the meeting is people-oriented - every person 
reports one by one. Many Kanban teams use a more board-oriented 
format, focusing on bottlenecks and other visible problems. This approach 
is more scalable. If you have 4 teams sharing the same board and doing 
their daily standup meeting together, we might not necessarily have to 
hear everyone speak as long as we focus on the bottleneck parts of the 
board. 
In Scrum, burndown charts are prescribed 
A sprint burndown chart 
shows, on a daily basis, how 
much work remains in the 
current iteration. 
The unit of the Y-axis is the 
same as the unit used on the 
sprint tasks. Typically hours 
or days (if the team breaks 
backlog items into tasks) or 
story points (if the team 
doesn’t). There are lots of variations of this though. 
In Scrum, sprint burndown charts are used as one of the primary tools for 
tracking the progress of an iteration. 
Some teams also use release burndown charts, which follows the same 
format but at a release level – it typically shows how many story points 
are left in the product backlog after each sprint. 
The main purpose of a burndown chart is to easily find out as early as 
possible if we are behind or ahead of schedule, so that we can adapt. 


MINOR DIFFERENCES | 39 
 
In Kanban, burndown charts are not prescribed. In fact, no particular type 
of chart is prescribed. But you are of course allowed to use any type of 
chart you like (including burndowns). 
Here’s an example of a Cumulative Flow diagram. This type of chart 
illustrates nicely how smooth your flow is and how WIP affects your lead 
time. 
 
Here’s how it works. Every day, total up the number of items in each 
column on the Kanban board and stack these on the Y axis. So on day 4 
there were 9 items in the board. Starting from the right-most column there 
was 1 item in Production, 1 item in Test, 2 items in Dev, and 5 items in 
the Backlog. If we plot these points every day and connect the dots we get 
a nice diagram like the one  above. The vertical and horizontal arrows 
illustrate the relationship between WIP and lead time. 
The horizontal arrow shows us that items added to the backlog on day 4 
took on average 6 days to reach production. About half of that time was 
Test. We can see that if were to limit the WIP in Test and Backlog we 
would significantly reduce the total lead time. 
The slope of the dark-blue area shows us the velocity (i.e. number of 
items deployed per day). Over time we can see how higher velocity 
reduces lead time, while higher WIP increases lead time. 


40 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Most organizations want to get stuff done faster (= reduce lead time). 
Unfortunately many fall into the trap of assuming that this means getting 
more people in or working overtime. Usually the most effective way to 
get stuff done faster is to smooth out the flow and limit work to capacity, 
not add more people or work harder. This type of diagram shows why, 
and thereby increases the likelihood that the team and management will 
collaborate effectively. 
It gets even more clear if we distinguish between queuing states (such as 
“waiting for test”) and working states (such as “testing”). We want to 
absolutely minimize the number of items sitting around in queues, and a 
cumulative flow diagram helps provide the right incentives for this. 


 
41 
15 
Scrum board vs. Kanban board 
– a less trivial example 
In Scrum, the sprint backlog is just one part of the picture – the part that 
shows what the team is doing during the current sprint. The other part is 
the product backlog – the list of stuff that the product owner wants to have 
done in future sprints. 
The product owner can see but not touch the sprint backlog. He can 
change the product backlog any time he likes, but the changes don’t take 
effect (i.e. change what work is being done) until next sprint. 
 
When the sprint is done, the team “delivers potentially shippable code” to 
the product owner. So the team finishes the sprint, does a sprint review, 
and proudly demonstrates features A, B, C, and D to the product owner. 
The product owner can now decide whether or not to ship this. That last 
part – actually shipping the product – is usually not included in the sprint, 
and is therefore not visible in the sprint backlog. 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


42 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Under this scenario, a Kanban board might instead look something like 
this: 
 
Now the whole workflow is on the same board – we’re not just looking at 
what one Scrum team is doing in one iteration. 
In the example above the “Backlog” column is just a general wish list, in 
no particular order. The “Selected” column contains the high priority 
items, with a Kanban limit of 2. So there may be only 2 high priority 
items at any given moment. Whenever the team is ready to start working 
on a new item, they will take the top item from “Selected”. The product 
owner can make changes to the “Backlog” and “Selected” columns any 
time he likes, but not the other columns. 
The “Dev” column (split into two sub-columns) shows what is current 
being developed, with a Kanban limit of 3. In network terms, the Kanban 
limit corresponds to “bandwidth” and lead time corresponds to “ping” (or 
response time). 
Why have we split the “Dev” column into two sub-columns “Ongoing” 
and “Done”? That’s to give the production team a chance to know which 
items they can pull into production. 
The “Dev” limit of 3 is shared among the two sub-columns. Why? Let’s 
say there are 2 items in “Done”: 
 


SCRUM BOARD VS KANBAN BOARD – A LESS TRIVIAL EXAMPLE | 43 
 
That means there can only be 1 item in “Ongoing”. That means there will 
be excess capacity, developers who could start a new item, but aren’t 
allowed to because of the Kanban limit. That gives them a strong 
incentive to focus their efforts and helping to get stuff into production, to 
clear the “Done” column and maximize the flow. This effect is nice and 
gradual – the more stuff in “Done”, the less stuff is allowed in “Ongoing” 
– which helps the team focus on the right things. 
One-piece flow 
One-piece flow is a kind of “perfect flow” scenario, where an item flows 
across the board without ever getting stuck in a queue. This means at 
every moment there is somebody working on that item.  Here’s how the 
board might look in that case: 
 
B is being developed at the moment, A is being put in production at the 
moment. Whenever the team is ready for the next item they ask the 
product owner that is most important, and get an instance response. If this 
ideal scenario persists we can get rid of the two queues “Backlog” and 
“Selected” and get a really short lead time! 
Cory Ladas puts it nicely: “The ideal work planning process should 
always provide the development team with best thing to work on next, no 
more and no less”. 
The WIP limits are there to stop problems from getting out of hand, so if 
things are flowing smoothly the WIP limits aren’t really used. 


44 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
One day in Kanban-land 
 
 
 
 


SCRUM BOARD VS KANBAN BOARD – A LESS TRIVIAL EXAMPLE | 45 
 
 
 
 
 


46 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
 
 
 
 


SCRUM BOARD VS KANBAN BOARD – A LESS TRIVIAL EXAMPLE | 47 
 
Does the Kanban board have to look like this? 
No, the board above was just an example! 
The only thing that Kanban prescribes is that the work flow should be 
visual, and that WIP should be limited.  The purpose is to create a smooth 
flow through the system and minimize lead time. So you need to regularly 
bring up questions such as: 
Which columns should we have? 
Each column represents one workflow state, or a queue (buffer) between 
two workflow states. Start simple and add columns as necessary. 
What should the Kanban limits be? 
When the Kanban limit for “your” column has been reached and you 
don’t have anything to do, start looking for a bottleneck downstream (i.e. 
items piling up to the right on the board) and help fix the bottleneck. If 
there is no bottleneck that is an indication that the Kanban limit might be 
too low, since the reason for having the limit was to reduce the risk of 
feeding bottlenecks downstream. 
If you notice that many items sit still for a long time without being 
worked on, that is an indication that the Kanban limit might be too high. 
• 
Too low kanban limit => idle people => bad productivity 
• 
Too high kanban limit => idle tasks => bad lead time 
How strict are the Kanban limits? 
Some teams treat them as strict rules (i.e. the team may not exceed a 
limit), some teams treat them as guidelines or discussion triggers (i.e. 
breaking a kanban limit is allowed, but should be an intentional decision 
with a concrete reason). So once again, it’s up to you. I told you Kanban 
wasn’t very prescriptive right? 


 
49 
16 
Summary of Scrum vs. Kanban 
 
Similarities 
• 
Both are Lean and Agile. 
• 
Both use pull scheduling. 
• 
Both limit WIP. 
• 
Both use transparency to drive process improvement. 
• 
Both focus on delivering releasable software early and often. 
• 
Both are based on self-organizing teams. 
• 
Both require breaking the work into pieces. 
• 
In both, the release plan is continuously optimized based on 
empirical data (velocity / lead time). 
Free Online Version
Support this work, buy the print copy: 
http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-
scrum-minibook 


50 |KANBAN AND SCRUM – MAKING THE MOST OF BOTH 
 
Differences 
Scrum 
Kanban 
Timeboxed iterations 
prescribed. 
Timeboxed iterations optional. 
Can have separate cadences for 
planning, release, and process 
improvement.  Can be event-
driven instead of timeboxed. 
Team commits to a specific 
amount of work for this iteration. 
Commitment optional.  
Uses Velocity as default metric 
for planning and process 
improvement. 
Uses Lead time as default metric 
for planning and process 
improvement. 
Cross-functional teams 
prescribed. 
Cross-functional teams optional. 
Specialist teams allowed. 
Items must be broken down so 
they can be completed within 1 
sprint. 
No particular item size is 
prescribed.  
Burndown chart prescribed 
No particular type of diagram is 
prescribed 
WIP limited indirectly (per 
sprint) 
WIP limited directly (per 
workflow state) 
Estimation prescribed 
Estimation optional 
Cannot add items to ongoing 
iteration. 
Can add new items whenever 
capacity is available 
A sprint backlog is owned by 
one specific team 
A kanban board may be shared 
by multiple teams or individuals 
Prescribes 3 roles (PO/SM/Team) Doesn’t prescribe any roles 
A Scrum board is reset between 
each sprint 
A kanban board is persistent 
Prescribes a prioritized product 
backlog 
Prioritization is optional.  


SCRUM BOARD VS KANBAN BOARD – A LESS TRIVIAL EXAMPLE | 51 
 
There. That’s it. Now you know the differences. 
But it ain’t over yet, now it’s time for the best part! Put on your boots, it’s 
time to jump into the trenches with Mattias and see what this looks like in 
practice! 
